![Open educators are mindful of sharing have collaborative vision, use
inclusive pedagogy and measure learning in open
ways.](media/image6.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

#### **Welcome to Day 11!**

Greetings! - My name is Maureen Glynn. I'm an Instructional Designer at
Ryerson University and an eCampusOntario Open Education (OE) Fellow. I'm
still on my own path towards becoming an open educator and welcome as
much company as possible on the journey! I'll share some ideas from
people who have reflected deeply on what it means to teach and learn in
the open and invite you to add your voice to the conversation. Look for
me on Twitter [\@MGtheID](https://twitter.com/MGtheID).

This module looks at the "Anatomy of an Open Educator" and, as you enter
the final third of this course you are no doubt beginning to resemble
the model pictured above. In earlier modules, you examined how to build
an open community, used open tools, figured out the world of CC
licenses, and considered OER Advocacy, all of which are part of the DNA
of an open educator. However, it is important for us to pause here and
consider the full profile of an Open Educator since it has been argued
that those who teach play a central role in the ultimate success of Open
Education. (Nascimbeni & Burgos, 2016).

Much of this Module has been informed by the [Open Educator Factory
Project](https://wikieducator.org/Research/open_educators_factory), an
undertaking dedicated to exploring the role of university teachers as
"agents of change" for openness in education.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ![](media/image3.png){width="0.6666666666666666in"                    |
| height="0.5833333333333334in"} Find, Review, Reflect                  |
|                                                                       |
| Search Nascimbeni and Brugos definition of "The Open Educator", which |
| emerged from their research for the Open Educator Factory Project.    |
|                                                                       |
| Once you have located and reviewed the definition, reflect on and     |
| note the language and ideas within in it that you connect with most   |
| readily.                                                              |
+=======================================================================+
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

#### **Intention**

The purpose of this module is to provide you with an opportunity to
explore the following:

-   Defining characteristics of Open Educators

-   Frameworks for assessing your own level of openness as an educator

-   Strategies for developing your skills and approaches to become a
    more open educator

#### **An Eye for Open Design**

![close up image of an
eye](media/image2.png){width="3.401042213473316in"
height="2.3722845581802274in"}

Open educators are collaborative in their vision for curriculum and
learning design in the following ways:

-   They share their ideas and plans for their courses

-   They invite input on their designs for teaching and learning

-   They engage other subject matter experts, as well as past, present,
    and potential students in dialogue about their designs

-   They document their learning design process for the benefit of
    themselves and others

#### **A Mind for Open Content**

![illustration of a
brain](media/image10.png){width="4.638888888888889in"
height="3.5555555555555554in"}

Open Educators are broadly mindful of sharing with respect to the
resources that they use in their teaching. Some examples of their
sharing practices include:

-   They release their own work with open licenses, and through multiple
    vehicles such as social media and repositories

-   They search for and make use of OER created and shared by others
    through the vehicles mentioned above

-   They think beyond the classroom when sharing their work and consider
    the community and non-enrolled learners as users of their content

Mindfulness is an important characteristic of the open educator. In the
words of Nascimbeni and Brugos (2016), open educators understand that
"\....collaboration bears a responsibility towards the work of
others."(p.4)

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ![](media/image4.png){width="0.8333333333333334in"                    |
| height="0.8333333333333334in"}Think About it....                      |
|                                                                       |
| What does it mean to have a responsibility towards the work of        |
| others? What issues of privacy or use of personal data should an open |
| educator consider in their work?                                      |
+=======================================================================+
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

#### **A Heart to Embrace Open Pedagogies**

![image of hearts](media/image9.png){width="4.541666666666667in"
height="3.0277777777777777in"}

In their pedagogy, open educators embrace and include others in their
strategies for knowledge creation. The see their students as co-creators
of knowledge and themselves as learners as well as teachers. Open
educators have been described as those who value social learning and
challenge traditional roles and expectations of teaching (Cronin, 2017)
In doing so, open educators give learners greater agency in their own
outcomes and those of their peers.

#### 

#### **A Hand in Open Assessment**

![hand with a measure tape wrapped around
it](media/image5.png){width="4.013888888888889in"
height="3.5416666666666665in"}

Open educators have a hand in assessment, but importantly, they loosen
their grasp on certain aspects of learning evaluation and leave room for
the hands of others as well. They re-set their grip on assessment by:

-   Encouraging peer and collaborative evaluation

-   Supporting use of ePortfolios and personal domains as homes for
    student work

-   Inviting other stakeholders and communities of practice to
    participate in assessment of learners' work

-   Soliciting feedback from students and others in an effort to
    continually improve their practice

#### **A Discoverable Presence**

Much of the research on open educators agrees on one critical
characteristic - that is that they are, by nature, networked individuals
who have established online identities. In other words, they have made
themselves "discoverable", and are connected with those who have done
the same.

As a result of this presence in networked and online spaces, ongoing
effort and consideration is required by open educators to maintain a
balance between privacy and openness (Cronin, 2017).

![balanced scales](media/image7.png){width="2.763888888888889in"
height="2.7777777777777777in"}

#### **The Whole Picture**

When you take all of these parts of the open educator anatomy and
combine them into a living, breathing person, what does that look like?

Watch this video of [[Simon
Bates]{.underline}](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UfBQ8MgPooM), a
Killam Teaching Prize winner at his home institution of University of
British Columbia (Runtime 2 min 5 seconds):

![Simon Bates, 2016 UBC Killam Teaching
Prize](media/image1.jpg){width="4.869792213473316in"
height="3.6523436132983376in"}

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ![icon of a person with several thought clouds above their            |
| head](media/image8.png){width="0.8333333333333334in"                  |
| height="0.8333333333333334in"}Think About it....                      |
|                                                                       |
| Think about the anatomy of an open educator as described so far in    |
| the module.                                                           |
|                                                                       |
| -   How many of the characteristics can you identify in Simon's       |
|     video?                                                            |
|                                                                       |
| -   Would you describe Simon as an Open Educator?                     |
+=======================================================================+
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

#### **Summary**

As Catherine Cronin (2017) writes, "Open practice is not a one time
decision". (p.27). Correspondingly, becoming an open educator does not
happen overnight. There are so many aspects of an educators activities
that create opportunities for openness it is truly an ongoing process of
evolution. This evolution is not achieved without work,and it certainly
requires some stamina, but as earlier modules have made clear, the
benefits are multiple and many. And, of course, when you are in working
in the open, you are never alone!!

#### **Day 11 Activity**

##### **Option 1**

##### **An Open Education "Diagnostic"**

Sign up for the [Open Educators
Factory](https://rd.unir.net/pub/oef/login.php) platform and complete a
self assessment of your level of development in terms of Open Education.

Upon receiving your assessment and feedback - review the ideas, and
suggestions offered to support your development.

Set 3 development goals for yourself that will help you transition to
the next level as an open educator. Your goals may be specific to one
area of activity (Design, Content, Teaching, Assessment), or a
combination of areas, depending on your takeaways from your
self-assessment. Here are the the three goals:

-   One change you can make to your practice in the next week

-   One change you can make to your practice in the next month

-   One change you can make to your practice in the next year

You can choose to share your work in the Day 11 discussion forum in the
course shell, in a social media space, with family, friends, and
colleagues, or just save your goals to return to in one week, one month,
and one year.

##### **Option 2**

##### **Find an Open Education Training Buddy**

Learning is always better when you have company. Seek out a training
partner to work with as you develop your skills as an open educator.
Plan to meet with them in person or virtually or on a regular basis to
check in with one another on your development activities in the area of
open education. Your training partner might be a local colleague, or
even someone you have encountered in this course!

#### **Explore More**

eCampusOntario's Extend Modules: https://extend.ecampusontario.ca/

Open Educational Practices in Scotland Project - Becoming an Open
Educator: http://www.open.edu/openlearncreate/course/view.php?id=2274

#### **References**

Cronin, C. (2017). [Openness and praxis: Exploring the use of open
educational practices in higher
education](http://www.irrodl.org./index.php/irrodl/article/view/3096/4301).
The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning,
18(5). http://dx.doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v18i5.3096.

Nascimbeni, F., & Burgos, D. (2016). In Search for the Open Educator:
Proposal of a Definition and a Framework to Increase Openness Adoption
Among University Educators. The International Review Of Research In Open
And Distributed Learning, 17(6).
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v17i6.2736

Research/open educators factory (2017) In WikiEducator. Retrieved from
https://wikieducator.org/Research/open_educators_factory

#### **Image Credits**

Anatomy of an Open Educator by Maureen Glynn is licensed with a [CC BY
4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license

Hand Photo by [Jennifer
Burk](https://unsplash.com/photos/ECXB0YAZ_zU?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

#### **Attribution**

All content for *Making Sense of Open Education Day 11* by Maureen Glynn
is licensed with a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license
(unless otherwise indicated with citation and/or attribution).
