# Day 1 - What is Open Education? 

Welcome and thank you for joining the course community for this open
learning experience! If you haven\'t yet read the Making Sense as a
Research Project module, please review it to learn more about this
course as research.

This mini-MOOC (massive open online course) is designed to provide you
with an introductory-level tour of open educational practices (OEP) and
open educational resources (OER) for use in your personal education
context (whatever that looks like for you). It is also part of a
doctoral research project. Please read the linked document at the end of
this module for more information regarding your data and informed
consent. If you have any concerns or questions, please contact the
researcher, Jenni Hayman, by email jlhayman@asu.edu

Whether you are a student, a teacher, a librarian, an education support
professional, or all of the above, this course will likely have
something for you if you're new to open education. If you're an
experienced open educator, your support in networking and sharing with
others will be most welcome! The Moodle version of the course is running
live from June 1-15, 2018.

All materials from the course will be made available in downloadable,
editable formats with a Creative Commons [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license
(some course elements may be licensed differently but they will be
carefully labeled). However you choose to learn, we're happy to support
you in any way we can.

#### **The Course Team**

Over the 15 days of this course you will be interacting with a community
group of designers and facilitators that have agreed to learn with and
from you. They are Canadian open educators that support and promote open
educational practice (OEP) and use of open educational resources OER on
their college and university campuses. They are:

Lauren Anstey, Claire Coulter, Irwin DeVries, Helen DeWaard, Peggy
French, Maureen Glynn, Terry Greene, Joanne Kehoe, Jessica O'Reilly, and
Ali Versluis.

Everyone looks forward to your daily activity sharing, feedback, and
questions over the next two weeks.

#### **Intention**

The purpose of this module is to provide you with an opportunity to
explore the following:

-   Definitions of open educational practice (OEP) and open educational
    resources (OER)

-   Karl Weick's (1995) Sensemaking framework

#### **What is Open Education?**

![illustration of a variety of words related to open education including
sharing, redistribute, retain, reuse, remix, revise, OER transforms
access, affordability](Day1image001.jpg){width="6.041666666666667in"
height="4.222222222222222in"}

[OER is Sharing](https://www.flickr.com/photos/gforsythe/38088290601/)
by Giulia Forsythe is shared with a CC BY 4.0 International license

![icon of a megaphone to indicate important
content](Day1image002.png){width=".5in"
height=".5in"}

The [Cape Town Open Education
Declaration](http://www.capetowndeclaration.org/read-the-declaration)
established in 2007 is a good five-minute read to get a sense of the
global open education movement. If you agree with the principles and
want to commit to them, you can sign it!

**Consider the following definitions:**

Open Educational Resources (OER)

"\...any type of educational materials that are in the public domain or
introduced with an open license. The nature of these open materials
means that anyone can legally and freely copy, use, adapt and re-share
them. OERs range from textbooks to curricula, syllabi, lecture notes,
assignments, tests, projects, audio, video and animation" (UNESCO,
n.d.).

Open Educational Practices (OEP)

"\...is a broad descriptor of practices that include the creation, use,
and reuse of open educational resources (OER) as well as open pedagogies
and open sharing of teaching practices (Cronin, 2017).

OER-enabled Pedagogy

"\...the set of teaching and learning practices only possible or
practical when you have permission to engage in the 5R \[retain, reuse,
remix, revise, redistribute\] activities" (Wiley, 2017).

Open education is a combination of these ideas and can have many
contexts. There is something called "the global open education movement"
which involves people from all over the world engaging in research and
practice, collaborating and sharing ideas and content in primary,
secondary, tertiary, and lifelong learning contexts. The United Nations,
through [UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural
Organisation)](http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/access-to-knowledge/open-educational-resources/)
supports projects and policy related to open education and use of OER.
Many nations including South Africa, Kenya, India, Brazil, Poland, and
Norway (to name just a few), are engaged in significant research and
work around the adoption, adaptation, and creation of OER for learning.
Foundations including [The William and Flora Hewlett
Foundation](https://www.hewlett.org/strategy/open-educational-resources/)
fund projects for research and creation of OER, and many government
organizations (including the European Union Commission) and
non-government organizations (NGOs) support and fund the work of open
education to increase access and reduce costs overall.

Do any of the ideas in these definitions resonate with you as practices
and ideas that you already value? Which definitions (if any) make the
most sense for your learning and work? There are more web pages that
describe these ideas if you wish to do some reading and exploring in the
Explore More section of this module.

**Watch the following 3 minute video that explores global connections
made possible through the use of Open Educational Resources:
[[https://vimeo.com/51075488]{.underline}](https://vimeo.com/51075488)**

### Video Transcription

A few years ago

A professor taught a climate change course

reaching about 100 students per semester

One day he thought "If I could upload this course on line,

then not only would my 100 students

have access to it, but others as well."

So he did, and this is what happened

Anna sent the course's content across the country to Alex

who was studying climate change

Alex found it so interesting that he forwarded a copy to his friend Lulu
in Africa

Lulu was developing peer-to-peer courses with Philip

so they remixed the content with other resources and created a new
course

about the impacts of climate change in Africa

Alan, a participant in the course, shared the content with Gabby,

who was studying environmental policy in America

Gabby brought the content to her class

and together, they translated it into Spanish

After that, Gabby's professor shared it with his other classes

Mira, another student, shared the content with her father

who passed it on to his colleagues

Gabby's professor also forwarded the content to David,

a colleague in the UK who was researching climate change

He updated some of the data, adapted it to his study,

and published an article in an open journal

Researchers from all over the world were able to read the article

David sent the updated content back to the original professor,

by then, the course had reached so many more people than his 100
students

Years later, many schools have begun to follow the example

and opened access to their content.

Governments began promoting the use of open textbooks

Students began saving money on books

Other innovative universities began to open access to entire courses

Making them available to participants from all over the world.

These are open educational resources

Teaching, learning, research resources,

that can be reused, redistributed, remixed, and revised

Open educational resources are accessible to everyone,

learners, teachers, researchers, parents, workers, citizens, to you.

This is open education, knowledge as a public good.

Everyone has the right to be educated, yet only a few have access to
school

Open educational resources increase access to, improve quality of, and
reduce costs of education. Sharing knowledge is important

Now you know, open educational resources give everyone the opportunity
to learn.

#### **The Five Rs**

![icon of a megaphone to indicate important
content](Day1image003.jpg){width=".25in"
height=".25in"}

Read the following short blog post (5 minute read) on the Five Rs of
OER: [Defining the \"Open\" in Open Content and Open Educational
Resources](http://opencontent.org/definition/).

#### **Quick Introduction to Creative Commons Licenses**

You will explore and learn much more about open licenses later in the
course. The illustration below is a quick introduction to the most
common open license (and icons) that you\'ll see when exploring OER.

![list of the creative commons licenses with requirements for
use](Day1image004.png){width="6.5in" height="4.972222222222222in"}

[(]{.mark}[Creative Commons licenses
explained](http://foter.com/blog/how-to-attribute-creative-commons-photos/)
[Â©Foter (adapted by Jisc) via Foter blog]{.mark} CC BY-SA

The following explanations provide some introduction to the complexity
of the CC licenses:

**CC0** is a public domain dedication. It means that no attribution or
credit for the original author is needed. You can adapt it any way you
wish and even use it commercially.

**CC BY** means that you must give credit (attribution) to the original
author. You can adapt and use it commercially if you wish. However,
attribution is not negotiable.

**CC BY SA** is a CC BY license plus "ShareAlike." This means that you
must attribute it and share any adaptations you make with the same CC BY
SA license.

**CC BY NC** is CC BY plus "Non-Commercial" which means that you can use
it with attribution, you can adapt it, but you cannot sell it or profit
from it except to recuperate costs of printing for example. It is a
non-profit license.

**CC BY NC SA** is CC BY plus "Non-Commercial" plus "Share Alike" which
means that you can use it with attribution, you can adapt it, but you
cannot sell it or profit from it and you must share it again using CC BY
NC SA.

**CC BY ND** is CC BY plus "No Derivatives" which means that you can use
it with attribution but you cannot adapt it.

**CC BY NC ND** is CC BY plus "Non-Commercial" plus "No Derivatives"
meaning you can use it with attribution, you cannot adapt it, and you
cannot sell it or profit from it except to recuperate costs of printing
for example. It is a non-profit license.

#### **Sensemaking**

"Sensemaking is what it says it is, namely, making something sensible.
Sensemaking is to be understood literally, not metaphorically" (Weick,
1995, p. 16).

![illustration of two human heads made of small colourful cogs, there
are cogs between the two heads meant to indicate a sharing of
ideas](Day1image006.png){width="4.416666666666667in" height="2.75in"}

[Knowledge-sharing](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Knowledge-sharing.jpg)
by
[Ansonlobo](https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Ansonlobo&action=edit&redlink=1)
is shared with a [CC BY SA 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed.en)
license.

In 1995, Karl Weick published a change management book called
Sensemaking in Organizations. This work described decades of Weick's
experience conducting research and observing applied practice in
organizational behaviour. He devoted significant space to the work of
other researchers to ensure a broad perspective about how individuals,
teams, and administrators make sense of internal and external
organizational influences.

Since 1995 (when Weick published his book), global teaching and learning
has been influenced in many ways by Internet-enabled information and
communication. Education institutions and educators in many places are
grappling with the shift of power that the Internet represents. This
shift may be seen as a revolution against expertise in the hands of few,
to expertise in the hands of many. It must be acknowledged that this is
a revolution of privilege, those privileged with access to the Internet.
However, access seems to be growing exponentially minute-by-minute.

Weick's (1995) processes of sensemaking have been applied to many
for-profit, non-profit, and educational contexts over time. Weick's
framework was selected for this open research to bring a focus to the
unique organizational structures and systems of post-secondary
institutions, and the predominantly individual nature of the work of
educators. Weick's framework was also selected to help address the
concept that Internet-enabled, abundant information and OER represent
external influences that may be causing a disruption in how
post-secondary educators conduct their practice. While it is important
that open education and use of OER make sense to administrators,
departments, and teams -- so that policy and support structures may be
created -- for purposes of this research project, and this course, the
critical stakeholders for use of OER are educators.

The following quote from Weick's book summed up the key questions of
sensemaking as a process, he stated, "...sensemaking begins with the
basic question, is it still possible to take things for granted? And if
the answer is no, if it has become impossible to continue with automatic
information processing \[the status quo\], then the questions become,
'why is this so?' And, 'what next?'" (Weick, 1995, p. 14).

#### **Summary**

When open education and use of OER begin to make sense to an educator
(for a variety of reasons), researching, curating, adapting, and sharing
OER becomes the "what next?" of open educational practice. This course
is about determining for yourself whether use of OER makes sense for
your practice, and if so, "what next?" in terms of learning more about
open education, finding and using OER, and developing OEP.

#### **Day 1 Activity**

Find (or make) and share a video, web page, illustration, photo, or
diagram that explains what open education means to you as you begin this
course. Include information about what you would like to to learn more
about over the next two weeks. You can choose to share your work in the
Day 1 discussion forum in the course shell, in a social media space,
with family, friends, and colleagues, or just save your output for your
own reflection.

#### **Explore More**

Any of Catherine Cronin's Blog Posts https://catherinecronin.net/

Giulia Forsythe's amazing photos and conference and presentation notes
on Flickr https://www.flickr.com/photos/gforsythe/

[OER Toolkit from College Libraries
Ontario](https://tlp-lpa.ca/oer-toolkit/home). Fantastic beginning
resource.

#### **References and Copyright Information**

Cronin, C. (2017). Openness and praxis: Exploring the use of open
educational practices in higher education. International Review of
Research in Open and Distributed Learning 18(5), 15-34. Retrieved from
<http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/3096>. Licensed
under a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.

UNESCO (n.d.). What are open educational resources? \[web page\].
Retrieved from
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/access-to-knowledge/open-educational-resources/what-are-open-educational-resources-oers/>.
All contents of this webpage are Â©UNESCO and may be used for personal
and non-commercial purposes.

Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications. Â©Sage Publications.

Wiley, D. (2017). OER enabled pedagogy \[blog post\]. Retrieved from
<https://opencontent.org/blog/archives/5009>. Licensed under a [CC BY
4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
license.

#### **Non-captioned Image Credits**

Megaphone icon by eCampusOntario is licensed under a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.

Image of Jenni Hayman is an unpublished selfie taken in April, 2018 at
the OE Global conference in Delft, Netherlands. The image is licenses
with a [CC BY NC 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) license.

Featured in "The Research Project" section of this module: [OER Programm
Logo](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:OER-Programm-Logo.jpg) by
Markus BÃ¼sges (leomaria) is licensed with a [CC BY SA 3.0
Unported](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en)
license

#### **Attribution**

[All content for Making Sense of Open Education Day 1 by Jenni Hayman is
licensed with a]{.mark} [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) [license
(unless otherwise indicated with citation, referencing, and
attribution).]{.mark}
