#### **Intention**

The purpose of this module is to provide you with an opportunity to
explore the following:

-   Examples of collaboration among open educators

-   Tools and Toolkits that empower collaboration

-   Communication channels to help find collaborators

![photo of a group of musicians with two violinists in the
foreground](media/image1.jpg){width="6.5in"
height="4.333333333333333in"}

Photo by [Manuel NÃ¤geli](https://unsplash.com/photos/7CcPLtywRso) on
Unsplash

Hello again! It's me, Jenni. When I consider collaboration, I consider
the life of a musician. There is no profession that I can think of that
is more highly and immediately collaborative than musician. I spent many
years as a professional jazz and classical singer and there was nothing
in my world more thrilling than a live performance that had been
well-rehearsed with a group of dedicated colleagues. Every single person
on stage, no matter the size of the group, prepared and practiced, alone
and with the group for a single moment in time. The sum of our parts was
a whole sound experience for the audience. The pressure to be perfect,
not to disturb the balance and flow of the performance was tremendous,
trust in each other was critical, energy was focused, breathing was
timed and tested. Musicianship as a craft is collaboration at its
finest. Listening to a recording is a dim echo of seeing a live
performance where diverse individuals move and shape sound as one unit.
I encourage you to reflect on it next time you attend a concert.

The lessons I carry from my life as a musician transfer to my life as an
educator. I am not only open, but also highly collaborative. I am always
willing to jump into a project (reasonable time allowing), and I'm
becoming more comfortable asking for support and engagement with
collaborators when I want to create great projects.

Collaboration is not necessarily easier than working individually. I
notice my mistakes more when I collaborate (or at least I worry about
them more). I hesitate to ask for contributions from others because I
don't want to bother them, they're busy. My colleagues do not always
organize or write the way that I do. We have differences. I fear
feedback, although I know and trust my colleagues, and know that my work
is always better when I consider their ideas in addition to my own. This
course was designed by me and ten other generous and smart friends. They
are friends I have made by being open, being willing to try new things,
and saying yes when asked to contribute to their work. The course
wouldn't be nearly as good, or interesting if I had done it all myself.
Collaboration is not always faster, or easier, but it is almost always
better. Diversity of perspectives, design styles, opinions, and curation
in this course have hopefully added up to a learning experience that
resonates more effectively for participants because there are multiple
representations in the design.

#### **Collaboration Begins with Colleagues**

![letters C and ) with embedded words in them such as learn, exist,
teach, create, host, lead,
etc.](media/image3.png){width="2.6927088801399823in"
height="2.078581583552056in"}

Pixabay - public domain

##### **Local Options**

One method for learning more about open is to learn with local
colleagues. Whatever your education situation, you likely have contact
with others in your discipline, and peers at your organization or
institution with whom you connect on a regular basis. While your peers
may not yet know about OER or OEP, they are educators and have a wealth
of experience that can enrich a project. It's difficult to establish
trust relationships at a distance with people you've only just met. For
practice in collaboration on open work, it may be best to start locally.
Local collaboration also gives you an opportunity to test out new
knowledge about open by sharing it with others you already know. Of
course not all of your colleagues will be interested in open education,
it's always an invitation.

If you're working at a post-secondary institution and aren't certain
where to begin to find open colleagues to work on a project together,
check in with your library. Libraries are often the core of open
education and open access thinking and they may have advice and ideas
about like-minded colleagues with similar questions. There may already
be an OER committee formed that you can join or speak with. If you're
working in PreK-12, you might start with your principal or district
leaders to see if there are already OER initiatives underway.

##### **Digital and Distance Options**

In module two of this course, how to network was the topic of
conversation. This is an obvious step toward collaboration, building a
network of educators that share your discipline, your mode of teaching
(PreK-12, post-secondary, online, face-to-face), your region, etc. You
may wish to extend the opportunity of meeting others in this course to
working with them. If someone has described an open project that
interests you, do not be shy about asking how you might help. Describe
the skills and ideas you have to offer and see what happens.

#### **What Makes a Good Collaborator (or what to look for)?**

Read the following article (5 minute read) from SamePage (project
management and teamwork software) on the attributes of a good
collaborator. These are qualities that you might seek, and perhaps
qualities you want to model as part of collaboration. 10 Top Qualities
of a Great Collaborator

The 10 recommended qualities are as follows:

1.  Team focused

2.  Generous

3.  Curious

4.  Appreciative

5.  Listens to understand

6.  Seeks to find answers to the bigger questions

7.  Connects the dots or creates the dots

8.  Gives and expects trust

9.  Builds relationships; breaks down walls

10. Diplomatic

#### **Examples of Collaborative Open Projects**

##### **Collective Writing**

The Open Faculty Patchbook - Collectively Sharing Ideas and Workload

This collective teaching advice project started as an idea on a local
college campus in Ontario (S.S. Fleming College in Peterborough), and
rapidly went global. Multiple authors submitted blog posts on the topic
of teaching advice for the benefit of new-to-Fleming college faculty
members. It turns out that anyone can learn from these examples, and
anyone can contribute new examples. It's a living collaboration that
raises the boat for all teachers. There is also a new version, the [Open
Learner Patchbook](https://openlearnerpatchbook.org/) where learners
share their experience and advice. If you think learners aren't ready to
be co-creators, this patchbook may change your mind! Terry Greene is the
ring leader for these works \@greeneterry

##### **Collaborative Textbook Creation**

Rebus Foundation and Rebus Community are now testing a [Beta version of
a collaborative open textbook
tool](https://about.rebus.community/beta-projects-application-form/)
(project management). Thus far, Rebus has been involved in connecting
educators to collaboratively build several open textbooks. More about
their work can be found at this link: Rebus Foundation Projects

Rebus-community-created open textbook: Media Innovation and
Entrepreneurship

Blog Post (approximately a 10 minute read) 8 Things We Learned About
Making Open Textbooks from Making Media Innovation & Entrepreneurship

##### **Learners as Co-Creators**

Dr. Robin DeRosa worked at Plymouth State University in New Hampshire
(in the United States). She tells the story of the open textbook she
created in partnership with her undergraduate students on her blog post:
[My Open Textbook Pedagogy and
Practice](http://robinderosa.net/uncategorized/my-open-textbook-pedagogy-and-practice/)
This work is an exceptional example of what's possible when you have the
time and space to trust learners with the scholarly work of your
discipline.

Here's the book in progress Open Anthology of Earlier American
Literature

##### **Open Research**

![complex illustration depicting the multiple projects and findings of
the ROER4D project](media/image4.png){width="6.265625546806649in"
height="4.336770559930009in"}

The [ROER4D Global OER Research](http://roer4d.org/) project is an
outstanding example of regional research collaboration. Review the
multi-year project beginning with a link to their Infographic here:
[ROER4D
Map](http://roer4d.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/ROER4D-map-March-2017.pdf),
to get a sense of the scope and level of collaboration. The full project
and reports were just completed in December of 2017 so the data and
opportunities for further research are current and relevant.

#### **Communication Channels to find Collaborators**

In the Building Open Community module for this course, several
opportunities for building a network were described. These opportunities
are just as applicable to finding and partnering with collaborators.

Twitter - If you search for OER in the Twitter search box, see what
bubbles up. You can tell high quality community members by the excellent
work of others that they link to and share in their posts. It's worth
scouting around and reading profiles to find possible collaborators with
similar interests and disciplines.

eCampusOntario (for Ontario educators only) - email
open@ecampusontario.ca to join our ECHO listserv, and subscribe to our
[newsletter](https://www.ecampusontario.ca/news/). Other excellent
newsletters to subscribe to are:
[BCcampus](https://bccampus.ca/bccampus-around-the-web/) ; and Open
Education Consortium - Open Education News

Creative Commons Open Education Platform -
[CCOpenEdu](https://creativecommons.org/2017/09/05/invitation-join-cc-open-education-platform/) -
recommending this platform as a way to connect with hundreds of open
global educators. The listserv is a great channel to ask questions.

#### **Summary**

![image of a small herd of elephants
walking](media/image2.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.333333333333333in"}

Photo by Slim Emcee (UG) the poet Truth_From_Africa_Photography on
Unsplash

While the origin of the following quote cannot be confirmed, it's still
good wisdom: "If you want to go quickly, go alone; if you want to go
far, go together." It sums up the idea that it is often faster to
accomplish tasks (such as curating and adapting course resources) on
your own. However, if you want to increase your expertise, communicate,
empathize, (and often laugh) with other people in your discipline, hold
yourself to a higher standard of preparation, connect more effectively
with your learners, and share workload over time, collaboration on
curation, adaptation, and creation of OER presents many opportunities
for all of the above.

#### **Day 12 Activity**

**Option 1:** Partner up. Connect with someone (or a group of others) in
the course that will partner with you on an activity. Create a Google
Doc or other shared digital document and work together to create a post
on the benefits and challenges of collaboration in your experiences.
Choose someone to post it and credit all the creators. If you're feeling
extra fancy you can choose a Creative Commons license and ensure that
your work is shared more widely.

**Option 2:** Going solo. It is completely possible to collaborate on
works you create yourself, then invite collaborators to give feedback
for improvements. A tried and true pathway. Adapt or create a small OER,
post it in the discussion forum or elsewhere and invite ideas for ways
to improve it. Be specific about the type of feedback you're seeking.

**Option 3:** Reflection. If collaboration makes you uncomfortable, if
you're not certain what talents and expertise you have to offer in a
collaborative process, if you're shy, if you're annoyed by collaboration
(it can be annoying), do some reflecting on your concerns and
preferences. Go past your professional life, into your personal areas of
expertise, your hobbies, activities you enjoy doing with others. Is
there anything there worth noting that might inform professional
collaboration? Take some notes just for yourself.

#### **Explore More**

Watch the following 15 minute TED talk on connecting chickens to
collaboration: Cultivating Collaboration: Don\'t Be So Defensive! With
Jim Tamm

An American perspective on higher education collaboration by Roger G.
Baldwin and Deborah A. Chang: [Collaborating to Learn, Learning to
Collaborate](https://www.aacu.org/publications-research/periodicals/collaborating-learn-learning-collaborate).

#### **Attribution**

All content for Making Sense of Open Education Day 12 by Jenni Hayman is
licensed with a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license
(unless otherwise indicated with citation and/or attribution).
