#### **Day 14: OEP - Renewable Assignments**

![photo of a bowl of cut flower heads multiple types of
flowers](media/image2.jpg){width="6.194444444444445in"
height="4.638888888888889in"}

Photo by [Mike
Sharp](https://unsplash.com/photos/rGmJ2GyfUr0?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

#### **Intention**

The purpose of this module is to provide you with an opportunity to:

-   consider the rationale underpinning the "renewable assignment"
    concept

-   explore examples of renewable assignments

-   collect and share ideas for transitioning traditional closed and
    disposable assignments toward open and renewable options

#### **Module Author**![photo of Jessica O\'Reilly](media/image1.png){width="2.2222222222222223in" height="1.9722222222222223in"}

Hi! I'm Jessica O'Reilly, an Instructional Developer at Cambrian
College, Open Education Fellow with eCampus Ontario, and Doctoral
student at Athabasca University. I'm excited to share the concept of the
renewable assignment with you, particularly as I've personally witnessed
positive changes in student engagement and success in my college-level
Communications courses when I reconceptualized my course assignments to
be more open and renewable.

I view Open as a cultural change which increases access to education by
reducing financial barriers. Open is also about sharing, collaborating,
and empowering. It's premised on an understanding that knowledge is for
all of us, and all of us can make meaningful contributions to the
collective commons.

Please follow me on Twitter
[\@Cambrian_Jess](https://twitter.com/Cambrian_Jess)!

#### **Disposable Assignments**

We've all been students at one point in time or another. You may have
noticed that in most courses, you're required to spend hours working on
assignments, only to have one person (the course instructor) read
through them once, slap a grade on them, and return them to you. What
did you end up doing with those assignments? Chances are, you looked at
the grade, maybe took some time to read through the comments, then you
tossed them into the recycle bin.

These types of assignments are what David Wiley, CAO of Lumen Learning,
Adjunct Professor at Brigham Young University, and major player in the
Open world, deems "disposable".^1^ In a 2013 blog post titled [What is
Open Pedagogy?](https://opencontent.org/blog/archives/2975), Wiley
argues:

> These are assignments that students complain about doing and faculty
> complain about grading \[\...\] Not only do these assignments add no
> value to the world, they actually suck value out of the world. Talk
> about an incredible waste of time and brain power (and a potentially
> huge source of cognitive surplus)!^2^

I'm a college-level educator who teaches mandatory English courses to
students who struggle to see the applicability of essay writing in their
future employment contexts. Over the past year, I've become deeply
troubled and critical of my role in enacting what bell hooks describes
as "rituals of control that \[are\] about domination and the unjust
exercise of power" (1994, p. 5). The traditional academic research paper
provides a poignant example of a prevalent assessment strategy which
tends to cause students a great deal of emotional distress. Further,
students struggle to find relevance in this type of assignment, and, for
the most part, become overwhelmed by the many implicit and explicit
conventions of academic writing and research. I've come to believe that
the traditional essay represents what Paulo Freire terms "antidialogical
action," a form of oppression which favours constraint, conformity, and
passivity over individual, reflective, creative processes that are
dialogical and active.^3^

The image I included at the beginning of this module reminds me of this
phenomenon: like flowers deadheaded and discarded in their prime,
assignments that have no real-world meaning are likely seen as nothing
more than a means to an end, a mark on a gradebook, an obstacle to
overcome and forget about. What a waste!

#### **Renewable Assignments**

Review the following video **beginning at minute 43:44** to hear Rajiv
Jhangiani, Special Advisor to the Provost on Open Education and a
faculty member in the Department of Psychology at Kwantlen Polytechnic
University, describe the disposable assignment. Hei also contrasts
traditional approaches with open assessment practices.

![Enhancing pedagogy via open educational practices - public lecture by
Rajiv Jhangiani](media/image3.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

From Rajiv\'s perspective, renewable assignments, a component of open
pedagogical practices, challenge the notion that students must passively
consume knowledge in a Freirian banking model sense, and instead invite
them to "critique and contribute to the body of knowledge from which
they are learning \[...\] knowledge is less a product that has distinct
beginning and end points and is instead a process in which students can
engage, ideally beyond the bounds of the course".^4^

#### **Day 14 Activity**

Consider the following list of examples, taken directly from the [Open
Pedagogy Notebook](http://openpedagogy.org/), the latest collaboration
between Rajiv Jhangiani and Robin DeRosa, a space for educators to
explore and share open assessment practices. Think about how you might
adapt one of the ideas for one of your courses. You can choose to share
your ideas in the Day 14 discussion forum, in a social media space, or
to save it for your own reflection and future use.

-   Adapt or remix OERs with your students. Even the simple act of
    adding problem sets or discussion questions to an existing open
    textbook will help contribute to knowledge, to the quality of
    available OERs, and to your students' sense of doing work that
    matters. The adaptation of the open textbook [Project Management for
    Instructional Designers](https://pm4id.org/) by successive cohorts
    of graduate students at Brigham Young University provides an
    excellent example of this approach.

-   Build OERs with your students. Though students may be beginners with
    most of the content in your course, they are often more adept than
    you at understanding what beginning students need in order to
    understand the material. Asking students to help reframe and
    re-present course content in new and inventive ways can add valuable
    OERs to the commons while also allowing for the work that students
    do in courses to go on to have meaningful impact once the course
    ends. Consider the examples of the open textbook [Environmental
    Science Bites](https://osu.pb.unizin.org/sciencebites/) written by
    undergraduate students at the Ohio State University or the [brief
    explainer
    videos](http://nobaproject.com/student-video-award/winners) created
    by Psychology students around the world and curated by the NOBA
    Project.

-   Teach your students how to edit Wikipedia articles. By adding new
    content, revising existing content, adding citations, or adding
    images, students can (with the support of the [Wiki Education
    Foundation](https://wikiedu.org/teach-with-wikipedia/)) make direct
    contributions to one of the most popular public repositories for
    information. Indeed, more than 22,000 students already have,
    including [medical students at the University of California San
    Francisco.](https://wikiedu.org/blog/2016/04/05/medical-students-wikipedia/)
    More than developing digital literacy and learning how to
    synthesize, articulate, and share information, students engage with
    and understand the politics of editing, including how "truth" is
    negotiated by those who have access to the tools that shape it.

-   Facilitate student-created and student-controlled learning
    environments. The Learning Management System (Canvas, Moodle,
    Blackboard, etc.) generally locks students into closed environments
    that prevent sharing and collaboration outside of the class unit; it
    perpetuates a surveillance model of education in which the
    instructor is able to consider metrics that students are not given
    access to; and it presupposes that all student work is disposable
    (as all of it will be deleted when the new course shell is imported
    for the next semester). Initiatives such as [Domain of One's
    Own](http://umw.domains/) enable students to build "[personal
    cyberinfrastructures](http://er.educause.edu/articles/2009/9/a-personal-cyberinfrastructure)"
    where they can manage their own learning, control their own data,
    and design home ports that can serve as sites for collaboration and
    conversation about their work. Students can choose to openly license
    the work that they post on these sites, thereby contributing OERs to
    the commons; they can also choose not to openly license their work,
    which is an exercising of their rights and perfectly in keeping with
    the ethos of Open Pedagogy. If students create their own learning
    architectures, they can (and should) control how public or private
    they wish to be, how and when to share or license their work, and
    what kinds of design, tools, and plug-ins will enhance their
    learning. It is important to point out here that open is not the
    opposite of private.

-   Encourage students to apply their expertise to serve their
    community. Partner with nonprofit organizations to create
    [opportunities for students to apply their research or marketing
    skills.](http://www.actionteaching.org/award/community-action) Or
    [ask them to write (and submit for publication) op-ed
    pieces](http://onlineteaching.kent.edu/library/online_assignments/OpEd_Handout.pdf)
    to share evidence-based approaches to tackling a local social
    problem. Demonstrate the value of both knowledge application and
    service by scaffolding their entry into public scholarship.

-   Engage students in public chats with authors or experts. Platforms
    such as Twitter can help engage students in scholarly and
    professional conversations with practitioners in their fields. This
    is another way that students can contribute to---not just
    consume---knowledge, and it shifts learning into a dialogic
    experience. In addition, if students are sharing work publicly, they
    can also use social media channels to drive mentors, teachers,
    peers, critics, experts, friends, family, and the public to their
    work for comment. Opening conversations about academic and
    transdisciplinary work---both student work and the work of
    established scholars and practitioners---is, like contributing to
    OERs, a way to grow a thriving knowledge commons.

-   Build course policies, outcomes, assignments, rubrics, and schedules
    of work collaboratively with students. Once we involve students in
    creating or revising OERs or in shaping learning architectures, we
    can begin to see the syllabus as more of a collaborative document,
    co-generated at least in part with our students. Can students help
    craft course policies that would support their learning, that they
    feel more ownership over? Can they add or revise course learning
    outcomes in order to ensure the relevancy of the course to their
    future paths? Can they develop assignments for themselves and/or
    their classmates, and craft rubrics to accompany them to guide an
    evaluative process? Can they shape the course schedule according to
    rhythms that will help maximize their efforts and success?

-   Let students curate course content. Your course is likely split into
    a predictable number of units (fourteen, for example) to conform to
    the academic calendar of the institution within which the course is
    offered. We would probably all agree that such segmenting of our
    fields is somewhat arbitrary; there is nothing ontological about
    Introduction to Psychology being fourteen weeks long (or spanning
    twenty-eight textbook chapters, etc.). And when we select a novel
    for a course on postcolonial literature or a lab exercise for
    Anatomy and Physiology, we are aware that there are a multitude of
    other good options for each that we could have chosen. We can
    involve students in the process of curating content for courses,
    either by offering them limited choices between different texts or
    by offering them solid time to curate a future unit more or less on
    their own (or in a group) as a research project. The content of a
    course may be somewhat prescribed by accreditation or field
    standards, but within those confines, we can involve students in the
    curation process, increasing the level of investment they have with
    the content while helping them acquire a key twenty-first century
    skill.

-   Ask critical questions about "open." When you develop new pathways
    based on Open Pedagogy, pay special attention to the barriers,
    challenges, and problems that emerge. Be explicit about them, honest
    about them, and share them widely with others working in Open
    Education so that we can work together to make improvements. Being
    an open educator in this fashion is especially crucial if we wish to
    avoid [digital redlining](http://bit.ly/2uq5SJC), creating
    inequities (however unintentionally) through the use of technology.
    Ask yourself: Do your students have access to broadband at home? Do
    they have the laptops or tablets they need to easily access and
    engage with OERs? Do they have the supports they need to experiment
    creatively, often for the first time, with technology tools? Do they
    have the digital literacies they need to ensure as much as is
    possible their safety and privacy online? Do you have a full
    understanding of the terms of service of the EdTech tools you are
    using in your courses? As you work to increase the accessibility of
    your own course, are you also [evaluating the tools and
    technologies](https://dgst101.com/activity-critically-evaluating-digital-tools-3f60d468ce74)
    you are using to ask how they help or hinder your larger vision for
    higher education?

"[Open Pedagogy](http://openpedagogy.org/open-pedagogy/)" by Rajiv
Jhangiani and Robin DeRosa is licensed under a [Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International
license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

#### **Explore More**

-   David Wiley's blog

-   Rajiv Jhangiani's blog

-   Open Pedagogy Notebook: Sharing Practices, Building Community

-   [In Search for the Open
    Educator](http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/2736).
    Journal article written by Fabio Nascimbeni and Daniel Burgos

-   [Open Assessment of Learning: A
    Meta-Synthesis](http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/2846)
    written by Andres Chiappe, Ricardo Alfonso Pinto and Vivian Arias

#### **Endnotes**

^1^David A. Wiley - Wikipedia

^2^What is Open Pedagogy? - David Wiley

^3^Pedagogy of the Oppressed - Paulo Freire

^4^From OER to open pedagogy - Harnessing the power of open - Robin
DeRosa and Scott Robinson

#### **Attribution**

All content for *Day 14: OEP - Renewable Assignments* by Jessica
O'Reilly is licensed with a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) license
(unless otherwise indicated with citation and/or attribution).
