![photo of a market stand with multiple types of fruits and
vegetables](media/image7.jpg){width="6.347222222222222in"
height="4.222222222222222in"}

Photo by [ja
ma](https://unsplash.com/photos/-gOUx23DNks?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

It's Saturday and you're at a bustling farmer's market. You scan the
bright displays of fruits, vegetables, and flowers. Some are more ripe
than others, some you prefer over others. Some you'll eat straight from
the carton, like the pint of blueberries. Others you will take home to
chop up and combine into a fantastic dinner recipe. You're inspired by
the seemingly limitless possibilities around you.

As of 2017, there were 1.4 Billion Creative Commons licensed works
available online ([Creative
Commons](https://stateof.creativecommons.org/), 2017). Open resources
can feel like that plentiful farmer's market. Yet presence alone does
not mean resources will be taken up or utilized to their full potential.

Increasingly it is recognized how an educator's decision to engage with
OER - by adopting or adapting an already available resource or by
creating one's own - is a complex one influenced largely by contextual
factors (Littlejohn & Hood, 2017; Pegler, 2012; Pirkkalainen, Jokinen, &
Pawlowski, 2014).

Hence, the focus of Day 10 - Adopt, Adapt, or Create?

#### **Intention**

The purpose of this module is to provide you with an opportunity to
explore the following:

-   The differences between and considerations for adopting, adapting,
    and creating an open educational resource (OER)

-   Engaging in an analysis of your teaching context to determine an
    adopt, adapt, or create approach to OER engagement

#### **Who's "Creating" Today's Module?**

Hi! I'm Lauren Anstey, an eLearning and Curriculum Specialist (aka
Educational Developer with eLearning and Curricular strengths) at
Western University's Teaching Support Centre. Since becoming an [Open
Ranger](http://laurenanstey.ca/blog-post/oeorangers-reflections-on-a-open-education-summit/)
my open educational practice has expanded beyond a sideline interest, to
a place of exploration and advocacy. I'm working on 'opening up' my own
course, *The Theory and Practice of Teaching and Learning in Higher
Education,* and co-chair Western University's *Open Education Working
Group*. [laurenanstey.ca](http://laurenanstey.ca/) \@ansteypants

#### **Exploring Terms: Adopt, Adapt, Create**

Watch the following 2 minute video [Adoption, Adaptation, & Creation
each play an important role in
teaching](https://www.youtube.com/embed/tz66Btoqnlg).

![Adopt, Adapt, Create](media/image3.jpg){width="6.5in"
height="4.875in"}

#### **The Influence of CC licenses** 

All openly licensed resources can be adopted, but not all can be
adapted. The open licence and the terms of that licence have influence
on how others can use the resource in question. Let\'s explore the
licensing terms that have the greatest influence on decisions for
adopting and adapting:

#### ![](media/image4.png){width="1.1111111111111112in" height="1.0416666666666667in"}**No Derivatives (ND)**

The No Derivatives (ND) term of a CC licence indicates that if you
remix, transform, or build upon the material (i.e. adapt), you may not
distribute the modified material. While this means there are
restrictions to adapting the work for any use beyond personal, the work
can still be adopted and shared with others as a whole.

#### ![](media/image2.png){width="1.1111111111111112in" height="1.0833333333333333in"}**Share-Alike (SA)**

A Share Alike (SA) term of a CC licence stipulates that if you remix,
transform, or build upon the material (i.e. adapt), you must distribute
your contributions under the same license as the original. This means
that any adaptations made must be shared back to the community under the
same open/CC licence.

#### ![](media/image1.png){width="1.1111111111111112in" height="1.0833333333333333in"}**Non-Commercial (NC)**

The Non-Commercial term of a CC licence indicates that you may not use
the material for commercial purposes (defined as commercial advantage or
monetary compensation). While the NC term doesn't prevent adaptation, it
limits the use of materials to non-commercial contexts.

It's important to note that:

-   Terms can be combined, for example, an
    Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA
    4.0)

-   The more terms placed on a licence, the less open it is. This is why
    Creative Commons flags the CC BY-NC-SA, and other similarly
    restrictive licenses, as "not a free culture licence". For more, see
    Creative Commons page on [Understanding Free Cultural
    Works](https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/public-domain/freeworks).

It's important to consider the CC licence under which a creative work
has been shared with you before adopting or adapting as your decisions
and use are ultimately influenced by the licence the creator has
selected.

#### **Choosing the Best Fit for your Teaching**

One of the greatest benefits of open resources is the flexibility to
modify and customize. Ultimately, the ways you choose to engage with
OERs for teaching will be heavily context-specific.

This section takes on a course design perspective to inform an approach
to OER adoption and decision-making, particularly around the decision to
adopt, adapt, or create.. From this lens, it is your teaching context
and your goals for students learning, that guides a needs analysis.

#### **Your Teaching Context** 

Deepening your engagement as an open educator comes by reflecting on how
OER can address your particular needs and manifest within your teaching
practice (WIld, 2012). Explore the following sections to scan your
teaching context and identify opportunities your OER
engagement.![illustration of teaching context, level is indicated by
stairs, students is indicated by a graduation cap, feedback is indicated
by a speech balloon, mode is indicated by a computer monitor and
supports is indicated by a search
pin](media/image5.png){width="3.0704265091863516in"
height="4.609375546806649in"}

##### **Level of Instruction** 

What level of instruction you're planning for? Do you teach introductory
understandings or advanced practices? Do students learn foundational or
highly specialized knowledge? Reflecting on these questions, you might
consider:

-   **Adopting** one of many OER previously developed for large
    enrolment, introductory subjects. These high quality and
    readily-available resources lend themselves nicely for adoption as
    they often address those concepts largely agreed upon as
    foundational to the disciplinary community

-   **Adapting** or **creating** OERs for more advanced levels of
    instruction in order to better contextualize the resource to
    specialized content

##### **Student Demographics**

Who are your students? What background and past experiences do they
bring to the classroom? How are their diverse voices represented (or
not) in current course materials? Who your students are and how they
engage with the course should inform your use of course materials. You
might consider:

-   **Adopting** a resource that resonates with students interests,
    identities, and background knowledge

-   **Adapting** resources into other formats to meet students needs,
    such as access

-   **Adapting** resources to include more diverse student perspectives.
    For example, case studies that take on particular perspectives,
    roles, or identities

-   **Creating** resources when student voices are found to be
    underrepresented in currently available materials

##### **Past Feedback**

What feedback have you previously received from students, particularly
in regards to the materials they utilized for learning? Have they
suggested areas for course improvement? Student feedback offers a
valuable perspective into possibilities for curricular change. You might
consider:

-   **Adopting** OER that can easily replace supplementary or
    recommended course materials, with the added benefit that students
    will no longer be required to purchase materials intended to be
    accessory

-   **Adapting** to create a 'custom fit' resource to your teaching. For
    example, rather than requiring the purchase of a whole textbook,
    individual chapters of an open text can be selected and curated

-   **Creating** resources that can uniquely address your instructional
    needs and/or the needs of your students. For example, custom
    learning activities, ancillary resources, cases, scenarios, or
    problems.

##### **Mode of Delivery**

Is your course offered face-to-face, blended, or online? How do you
deliver course resources to students? How do students prefer to
access/use materials? In terms of flexibility, the benefits of OER are
not just limited to customizing content, flexibility also means the
ability to increase accessibility. Resources can be accessed in a range
of modalities (e,g, print, digital) and formats (e.g. pdf, epub). As a
result, you might consider:

-   **Adopting** a resource by providing a link, integrating it into
    your learning management system (LMS), and/or arranging printing
    options with your local institutional bookstore or print shop.

-   **Adapting** a resource by adding to its accessibility, for example,
    adding closed captions to a video or translating from one language
    to another.

##### **Available Supports** 

Research shows that using OERs is strongly influenced by instructor
capacity to exercise the technical skills and digital literacies
necessary for adoption, adaptation, or creation (Cox & Trotter, 2017;
Cronin, 2017).

While you're awesome, you're likely not a superhero with ***all*** the
powers. Supports on campus from technical to educational development
expertise can be valuable additions to your 'toolkit' for OER
engagement. Your decision to adopt, adapt, or create might very well be
informed by the availability of localized supports that can help you
make your vision a reality. For example:

Librarians & Library Resources might provide\...

-   Licensing and copyright supports

-   Resources for searching for and identifying OER

-   Knowledge of public access repositories

Information Technologies (IT) specialists might provide:

-   Supports to upload your OER for public access

-   Expertise on the technical parameters for providing users with
    appropriate access

-   Instructional design resources for creating or adapting OER

Educational Developers might provide:

-   consultation on open educational practices

-   curriculum and design support

-   resources for evaluating your course resources

####  

#### **Learning Outcomes**

#### ![](media/image6.png){width="4.111111111111111in" height="6.166666666666667in"}

Learning outcomes are statements referring to the knowledge, skills, or
values that instructors expect students to develop, learn, or master by
the end of their learning (Suskie, 2009).

-   Statements are student-centred. They describe what the student will
    be able to do, know, or value by engaging in learning rather than
    what they will be taught or shown by the instructor.

-   Effective learning outcomes use action verbs to adequately reflect
    the nature of student engagement. These action verbs typically help
    distinguish the expected level of complexity expected of learning.

-   

If you already have learning outcomes written, take a moment to review
and circle the action verbs. New to learning outcomes? Try jotting down
a few ideas - what do you expect learners to be able to know, value, or
do?

#### **Levels**

Listed below are common categories of verbs organized by introductory to
complex (as based on [Bloom's
Taxonomy](https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/blooms-taxonomy/)).
Depending on the category, different OER possibilities for adoption,
adaptation, and creation are proposed.

##### 

##### **Remember, Understand** 

*Common Verbs*: define, describe, list, recognize, identify,
distinguish, discuss, select

At this level of learning, students are focused mainly on comprehension.
Often this requires understanding introductory content or concepts.
Instructors can model effective approaches for seeing the
interconnectivity between concepts (i.e. seeing the "big picture") by
supporting students in the rehearsal and use of learned knowledge. When
it comes to OER, consider:

-   **Adopting** open textbooks and other OER that serve as the readings
    or initial learning activities for comprehension

-   **Adapting** to create a 'custom fit' resource that addresses the
    specific concepts

-   **Creating** an open pedagogy assignment, for example, where
    students produce a diagram, infographic, or poster summarizing their
    learning that can be shared with the open community

##### **Apply, Analyze**

*Common Verbs:* choose, illustrate, practice, compare/contrast,
differentiate, relate

At this level of learning, students are expected to make connections.
Often this requires new contexts - examples, cases, scenarios, stories -
for applying or analyzing what has been learned. Instructors can model
analysis by engaging in the process themselves and by asking students to
practice themselves through learning activities that replicate the same
cognitive processes. When it comes to OER, consider:

-   **Adopting** OER that can provide you and your students with those
    new contexts for application - examples, cases, scenarios, stories,
    etc.

-   **Adapting** openly shared teaching resources, such as detailed
    learning activities, that support the types of practice activities
    required of student learning

-   **Adapting** cases, examples, or scenarios to suit the type of
    application activities students need to practice

-   **Creating** an open pedagogy assignment, for example, where
    students author examples or cases that can be shared with the open
    community

##### **Evaluate, Create**

*Common Verbs:* formulate, compose, appraise, judge, justify, estimate,
hypothesize

At this level of learning, students are extending their knowledge from
what was taught to new contexts and understandings. Students require
guidance to see how they can logically move beyond comprehension and
application to create something new. When it comes to OER, consider:

-   **Adopting** OER content that models the learning outcome. For
    example, open textbooks that include case studies and examples
    demonstrating evaluative thinking

-   **Adapting** OER content to add the supplementary content required
    for adequate modelling of the learning outcome

-   **Creating** an open pedagogy assignment, for example, student
    writing that articulates evaluation/critique (e.g. blog posts,
    essays, articles, or materials) that can be shared with the open
    community

#### **Summary**

This lesson has focused on distinguishing between adoption, adaptation,
and creation approaches to engaging with OER. Since the best decisions
for your own engagement will arise from your teaching context, this
lesson has aimed to guide you in an analysis of such contexts to suggest
adoption, adaptation, and creation possibilities.

##### **In sum, you might consider...**

**Adopting** when:

-   A CC ND licence prevents sharing your adaptation of the work

-   You teach introductory concepts

-   The resource resonates with students interests, identities, and
    background knowledge

-   The resource can easily replace supplementary or recommended course
    materials

-   There are already a variety of ways in which students can access and
    make use of a resource (e.g. print and digital formats)

-   You have access to localized institutional expertise (instructional
    and technical) for locating, evaluating, and adopting a resource

-   The resource currently aligns with your learning outcomes

**Adapting** when:

-   The CC licence does not include terms that restrict adaptations

-   You teach advanced knowledge or skills

-   Opportunity exists to expand the diversity of perspectives and/or
    accessibility of a resource

-   Creating a custom resource allows you to select and curate

-   You have access to localized institutional expertise (instructional
    and technical) for locating, evaluating and adapting a resource

-   The resource can be adjusted to aligns with your learning outcomes

**Creating** [when:]{.mark}

-   Student voices are found to be underrepresented in currently
    available materials

-   There is a unique need to address instructional needs such as custom
    content, activities, cases, or problems

-   You have access to localized institutional expertise (instructional
    and technical) for designing, developing, and sharing your created
    resource

-   There is opportunity to develop open educational practices that
    serve as new opportunities to meet your course learning outcomes

**Explore More**

##### **Adopting**

[BC Open Textbook Adoption
Guide](https://opentextbc.ca/adoptopentextbook/) a web-based guide by
[BCcampus](https://bccampus.ca/).

[Guidebook to Research on Open Educational Resources
Adoption](http://z.umn.edu/openguidebook), an open text by John Hilton
III, David Wiley, Lane Fischer, & Rob Nyland

[Adopting Open Educational Resources in the
Classroom](https://courses.candelalearning.com/pathways/), a course by
Lumen Learning

##### **Adapting** 

[Modifying an Open Textbook: What You Need to
Know](https://press.rebus.community/otnmodify/), an open textbook by
Cheryl Ciuller and colleagues

[BC Open Textbook Adaptation
Guide](https://opentextbc.ca/adaptopentextbook/), a web-based guide by
BCcampus

##### **Creating**

[Authoring Open Textbooks](https://press.rebus.community/authoropen/),
an open textbook by Melissa Falldin & Karen Lauritsen

[Creating and Modifying Open Educational
Resources](https://www.affordablelearninggeorgia.org/help/creating-1), a
tutorial by Affordable Learning Georgia

#### **References**

Creative Commons (2017). State of the Commons

Cronin, C. (2017). Openness and Praxis: Exploring the Use of Open
Educational Practices in Higher Education. International Review of
Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 18(5),

Cox, G. & Trotter, H. (2017). Factors shaping lecturers\' adoption of
OER at three South African universities. In C. Hodgkinson-Williams & P.
B. Arinto (Eds.), Adoption and impact of OER in the Global South (pp.
287--347). Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.601935

Littlejohn, A. & Hood, N. (2017). How educators build knowledge and
expand their practice. British Journal of Educational Technology, 48(2),
499-510. doi: 10.1111/bjet.12438

Pegler, C. (2012). Herzberg, hygiene and the motivation to reuse:
Towards a three-factor theory to explain motivation to share and use
OER. Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 1(4), doi:
10.5334/2012-04

Pirkkalainen, H., Jokinen, J. P., & Pawlowski, J. M. (2014).
Understanding social OER environments - A quantitative study on factors
influencing motivation to share and collaborate. IEEE Transations of
Learning Technologies, 7(4), 1939-1392. doi: 10.1109/TLT.2014.2323970

Suskie, L. (2009). Assessing student learning: A common sense guide.
(2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

#### **Image Credits**

Teaching Contexts by Lauren Anstey is licensed with a [CC BY NC 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) license

Learning Outcomes by Lauren Anstey is licensed with a [CC BY NC 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) license

#### **Attribution**

All content for *Making Sense of Open Education Day 10 (Adopt, Adapt, or
Create?)* by Lauren Anstey is licensed with a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license
(unless otherwise indicated with citation and/or attribution).
