#### **Day 7 - GLAM OER**

![illustration of a 19th century woman in a blue dress with an
umbrella](media/image3.jpg){width="2.9583333333333335in"
height="3.986111111111111in"}

[Gown by Maison
Laferri√®re](https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en/search/objects?q=gown&p=2&ps=12&st=Objects&ii=10#/RP-P-2009-1542,22)
from the public domain
[Rijksmuseum](https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en/rijksstudio) collection

#### **Intention**

The purpose of this module is to provide you with an opportunity to
explore the following:

-   What Galleries, Libraries, Archives and Museums (GLAM) have to offer
    in terms of OER

-   Places to search for GLAM OER

-   Teaching practice using GLAM OER

#### **Introduction**

As described in bullet point one of the Intention for this module, GLAM
stands for galleries, libraries, archives, and museums. GLAM is a subset
of OER that is growing in terms of number of resources. GLAM
institutions are learning more about what OER and Creative Commons
licensing means related to their digital collections, and agreeing
(because they are often publicly funded institutions) to release their
works with CC licenses.

Many of the OER you've explored thus far in the course are related to
traditional teaching and learning in academic and discipline-specific
ways. In addition to typical educational resources, there is a whole
realm of modern and historic artworks, archival documents, and public
library artifacts available as OER. Websites of open organizations that
share their collections can be used for a wide variety of teaching and
learning activities, especially when encouraging learners to explore and
share resources as part of assessments. Many of the artifacts in GLAM
collections are primary resources (original documents, artworks, etc.)
that are in the public domain in part because of the passage of time.

#### **Creative Commons GLAM Platform**

Many government-funded organizations (both GLAM and science-related)
share content openly. More and more are explicitly using Creative
Commons licenses as part of of their work.

The following is a link to current list (as curated by members of the
Creative Commons GLAM platform) of Galleries, Libraries, Archives, and
Museums that explicitly share using Creative Commons licenses: GLAM
Collection

#### **Examples**

##### **British Library - openly licensed as public domain**

![photo of 3 men on a triple bicycle](media/image5.jpg){width="6.5in"
height="4.416666666666667in"}

\"[Hundert Jahre in Wort und Bild. Eine Kulturgeschichte des XIX.
Jahrhunderts herausgegeben von Dr. S. Stefan. Mit 800
Text-Illustrationen,
etc.](https://www.flickr.com/photos/britishlibrary/11249354026/in/album-72157640537276514/)\"
by S. Stefan is in the public domain.

In December, 2013, the British Library "donated" over one million images
from 19th century books to Internet users and posted them on their
Flickr landing page seen at the following link: [British Library Flickr
Collection](https://www.flickr.com/photos/britishlibrary). Read the
following short article that describes the collection. The British
Library's "Mechanical Curator" million

Some of the images have been curated and organized into albums as seen
at the following link: British Library Albums

### **Rijksmuseum - openly licensed as public domain**

![colour illustration of six women on a walk wearing late 19th century
dresses](media/image1.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.652777777777778in"}

[Les modes de la
saison](https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en/my/collections/2152859--m/fashion-1850-1900/objecten#/RP-P-2009-3637,2),
1875 from the public domain Rijksmuseum collection.

Explore the following paper [Democratising the
Rijksmuseum](https://pro.europeana.eu/post/democratising-the-rijksmuseum)
(you can download the paper using the link at the bottom of the web
page) and explore the full collection of high resolution digital images
at the following link: Rijksmuseum Studio

The Rijksmuseum has an annual competition for artists and creators to
use images from their digital collection to create new art -- to reuse
and remix. There are some amazing examples at the following link: [2017
International Rijksmuseum
Award](https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en/rijksstudio-award).

### **NASA - open but not licensed**

![image from hubble telescope showing a variety of far away galaxies in
our solar system](media/image4.jpg){width="6.25in"
height="4.694444444444445in"}

[Hubble's Galaxy Cluster
Cornucopia](https://www.nasa.gov/image-feature/goddard/2018/hubbles-galaxy-cluster-cornucopia)
shared by ESA/Hubble & NASA

Most of the stunning images of our planets and other star systems
captured by NASA (the National Aeronautics and Space Administration) are
openly available to the public. Their use guidelines describe how images
may be used but they are not explicitly shared with Creative Commons or
other open licensing protocol. Read the [NASA Media Usage
Guidelines](https://www.nasa.gov/multimedia/guidelines/index.html) for
more information.

### **Library and Archives Canada - Flickr Collection**

![photograph of a group of young women wearing
kilts](media/image2.jpg){width="5.625in" height="5.916666666666667in"}

[Eight girls wearing kilts sit on a bench at Highland games, Antigonish,
Nova
Scotia](https://www.flickr.com/photos/lac-bac/41008117772/in/album-72157694921926975/)
by Ronny Jacques is licensed with a [CC
BY](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/) license.

Library and Archives Canada has also begun uploading and sharing images
through Flickr with open licenses. Check our their page at the following
link: Biblio Archives / Library Archives

#### **Using GLAM for Teaching**

History and art educators are well versed using primary resources from
GLAM sources as part of their teaching and learning. They often access
the collections of their institutional libraries to embed artifacts and
databases into their courses. Because of the move toward use of CC
license by GLAM organizations, these resources are now more available
outside of post-secondary libraries and learning management systems.
Here are a few pedagogic examples of how GLAM artifacts might be used
for teaching:

[Smarthistory](https://smarthistory.org/) is fantastic example of a
highly curated collection of GLAM materials designed specifically for
teaching. Their [At Risk Cultural
Heritage](https://smarthistory.org/arches-intro/) series describes
issues of social justice, political, and community concern related to
the destruction of cultural heritage sites. The website contains rich
opportunities for exploration and discussion for a number of
disciplines.

Creative Writing - with over one million images, the British Library
collection is rich fodder for creative writers. Here is an example from
Medium - post by Jenni Hayman - [The Goblin
Market](https://medium.com/@jennihayman/the-goblin-market-53b433bcec32).

Timelines (for a variety of good pedagogic strategies) can be authored
using GLAM resources and [Timeline JS](https://timeline.knightlab.com/),
an open-source, embeddable tool for creating accessible work. Check out
their [Examples](https://timeline.knightlab.com/#examples) page for
inspiration.

What are your ideas?

#### **Summary**

There are many places to explore and find OER that are not necessarily
in OER repositories. It's worth exploring what GLAM organizations in
your region are sharing and how that might benefit your education
practice and learners that you work with.

#### **Day 7 Activity**

Using GLAM for Teaching - Grab an image or other file type (audio,
video, text) from one of the GLAM repositories shared in this module, or
go and find your own. Prepare a short lesson in your discipline that
learners might explore using the artifact and share your idea through
the discussion forum, Twitter, your blog, or just keep it for your
private reflection.

#### **Explore More**

A face-to-face visit with your local public library can yield some
amazing finds in terms of what libraries have in the collections and
what they're able and willing to share. Go explore.

#### **Attribution**

Content for Making Sense of Open Education Day 7 by Jenni Hayman is
licensed with a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license
(unless otherwise indicated with citation and/or attribution).
