#### **Day 2 - Building Open Community**

## Intention

The purpose of this module is to provide you with an opportunity to
explore the following:

-   Benefits and challenges of a Community of Practice (CoP)

-   Common places and spaces to find and follow other open educators

#### **Introduction**

Part of the design of this course is to encourage you to connect with
other educators interested in learning more about open education. Here
are some ways to increase your network, share, and learn with others as
part of this course:

-   If you are a Twitter user and want to participate in course
    conversations there, we're using the hashtag #MakingSense18 for the
    15 days of the course

-   Post to the OpenLearn course daily discussion forum that is shared
    only by those registered in the course shell, it's a more private
    option if you prefer

-   If you have a blog you can blog about the daily activities link to
    them in discussions

-   Share your LinkedIn or Facebook identities with others and be clear
    about the topics you're interested in sharing and learning about

-   Share regional, discipline, and language interests as well

Having colleagues that you can learn with, and talk with is extremely
valuable as part of a sensemaking process. People in open education
networks tend to gather around common areas of interest, for example
there are open education doctoral researchers in the
[GO-GN.net](http://go-gn.net/) group (Global OER Graduate Network),
there are OER practitioner-researchers in the [Open Education
Group](http://openedgroup.org/fellowship). There are over 700 educators
in the Creative Commons Open Education Platform,
[CCOpenEdu](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-HPog_7pPUXrECzne1t6X7eKwo8TzpYBZ8iC8FfASoE/edit),
and many, many more examples.

![data visualization showing node connections between a variety of open
education community members some connections have more lines and bold
lines to demonstrate a higher number of tweets and
retweets](Day2image001.png){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

[GO-GN NodeXL graphic by Aras
Bozkurt](https://nodexlgraphgallery.org/Pages/Graph.aspx?graphID=149080)
was created April 22, 2018. With permission.

The image above is a visual depiction of the digital social connections,
and the strength of those connections based on frequent Twitter data.
The focus of the graphic is GO-GN network members, doctoral researchers
as they gathered face-to-face during an open global pre-conference
event. A common space for open educators to gather (for a variety of
reasons) is Twitter. If you don't have a Twitter account (and you may
have good privacy reasons for this choice), but you'd like to know more
about how to get started, please check the video in the Explore More
section of this module.

#### **Getting Started Building Community**

One way to begin connecting with others is through the OpenLearn
discussion forum for this course (if you're participating in the live
June 2018 version). You can begin to find common interests (by region,
discipline, or teaching context). Are you a PreK-12 teacher or
post-secondary educator? By sharing your story, your professional
education interests, your personal interests as appropriate, and what
you hope to learn more about, you may begin to establish connections
with peers in this course and beyond.

It's also completely okay (you don't need anyone's permission) to
observe the course and the behaviours and communication of others in the
course as part of your learning. This is sometimes called "lurking" in
the online teaching and learning environment, but it's not a very
positive term. Observing (as many new-to-something learners do) is a
valuable activity in the learning process.

#### **Lave and Wenger's (1991) Community of Practice (CoP)**

A Community of Practice can be many things to many different people
within and outside of it. Often practice communities are specific,
local, and face-to-face. However, the affordances of digital
communication have definitely shifted concepts of what makes a community
and who can be involved. A classic description of the behaviours of
communities of practice was provided by Lave and Wenger (1991), and
Wenger (1998) in their books on the subject. The following are three
components of a community of practice:

##### **Domain**

A domain of knowledge creates common ground, inspires members to
participate, guides their learning and gives meaning to their actions.

##### **Community**

The notion of a community creates the social fabric for that learning. A
strong community fosters interactions and encourages a willingness to
share ideas.

##### **Practice**

While the domain provides the general area of interest for the
community, the practice is the specific focus around which the community
develops, shares and maintains its core of knowledge (Wikipedia,
Community of Practice, n.d.)

![image of a megaphone to indicate important
content](Day2image004.jpg){width="1.1805555555555556in"
height="1.1805555555555556in"}

Wikipedia provides an effective introduction to Lave and Wenger's
Community of Practice model. Go exploring at the following link
(approximately 10-15 minute read depending on your level of
exploration): https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community_of_practice

![photo of a group of approximately 30 people at a
conference](Day2image005.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

[the ROER4D team at #oeglobal Cape
Town](https://www.flickr.com/photos/catherinecronin/32984020470/in/photolist-SfFJ97-shbfKE-rmib5P-FjHULy-RuS2aj-rkjDSN-G71ANJ-shtLoX-sfbxJA-G9jKUF-rkwkvx-shjZEG-Gb6WhU-FjHPLU-G71FXw-rZUxqu-s4rBKQ-shhm16-FhWAUN-shke8J-shk7jy-G71Fso-SB8bQf-G7y7Hk-FjUxec-Gb73bY-G71ERU-RzmFri-G5eSDY-GdpkdB-SDyCMT-SC2ubc-SDyTt6-G5eJdu-FhXJbj-Fi9bhM-RwS9Zq-Fi9x7T-GdpHHr-G5feYm-RxbEuS-SwHowx-SwHMEg-Sv6iwb-FNi4rs-SB86WN-GdpQ4c-GdpFm2-SDyoTF-Fi9jWF/)
by Catherine Cronin is licensed CC BY SA

##### **Communities of Practice:**

-   A community of practice is often organically created, with as many
    objectives as members of that community.

-   Community membership is defined by the knowledge of the members. CoP
    membership changes and members may take on new roles within the
    community as interests and needs arise.

-   A community of practice can exist as long as the members believe
    they have something to contribute to it, or gain from it.

-   A CoP is a group of people who are active practitioners.

-   The purpose of a CoP is to provide a way for practitioners to share
    tips and best practices, ask questions of their colleagues, and
    provide support for each other.

-   Membership is dependent on expertise -- one should have at least
    some recent experience performing in the role or subject area of the
    CoP (Wikipedia, Community of Practice, n.d.)

What we may have in common (those on the course team and taking this
course) is that we are practitioners, in one or more ways -- educators
or supporters for education. We practice things (teaching, course
design, librarianship, administration), typically with a focus on
creating effective learning experiences for students. The new element
for us as practitioners (and described in this course) is open
educational practice (OEP). But is it really new? You may be noticing
that you are already an open educator,and that you already engage in
open practice -- even without formal definitions of these activities.

#### **Challenges with CoPs (especially digital ones)**

Being part of a community of practice is a responsibility in terms of
acting with respect for others at all times. Being in community implies
that you are both contributing and benefitting from the dialogue and
sharing of community strategies related to your practice. If you are a
marginalized person in your local context and/or workplace, if you feel
like your opinions and voice are not valued, joining a new community can
feel very risky. Digital communication is much harder than face-to-face
communication (with all the accompanying human elements of nonverbal
communication -- body language, facial expression, tone of voice, etc.).
Misinterpretation is easy, and it's far too easy to be combative or
dismissive in digital spaces. If you are shy or more inclined to observe
than participate you may feel like you are missing out on some elements
of a CoP, it may feel risky to offer ideas or resources into the mix.
Access to digital communities, especially technology and education
oriented communities is privileged by easy access to the Internet and
English as a first language.

It is up to open education community members to be aware, and do as much
as possible to mediate power differences with respect to access,
language, and marginalization of those that wish to participate. What
have you experienced about these challenges? How do you feel you have
been successful thus far with the "open community?" These questions will
be part of the daily reflection for today's module.

![image of a megaphone to indicate important
content](Day2image004.jpg){width="1.1805555555555556in"
height="1.1805555555555556in"}

The following article [A Meta-Analysis of Open Educational Communities
of Practice and Sustainability in Higher Educational
Policy](https://journals.openedition.org/alsic/2908#tocto2n11) provides
good navigation in the front section for you to read specific sections,
or read the whole article (approximately 15 minute read). There are many
excellent definitions and multiple perspectives represented.

#### **Blogging as Scholarly Practice and Open Reflection**

Many members of the open education community are bloggers. There are a
few excellent examples below, and reading and writing blogs is
definitely worth exploring as you begin to make connections in open
education networks. It is also a great practice to blog (or reflect and
write) as you continue to make sense of the open concepts presented in
this short course. Suggestions to get started with blogging include
setting up a WordPress or Weebly site. There are a variety of good
videos that provide support to get started.

#### **Recommended Blogs for Exploration**

Helen DeWaard's [Five Flames 4
Learning](https://fiveflames4learning.com/) blog is a great space for
PreK-12 teachers and teacher candidates to explore digital literacy,
educational technology, and storytelling Helen.

[Audrey Watters](http://audreywatters.com/) website including Hack
Education and other spaces are an excellent source for critical thinking
about education technology.

Alan Levine (Cogdog) currently has a blog called
[CogDogBlog](http://cogdogblog.com/), and has been exploring digital
communication and communities of practice since the invention of the
Internet. His generosity and experimental work in technology-empowered
open pedagogy comes up a lot.

Martin Weller's [The EdTechie](http://blog.edtechie.net/) a wonderful
example of long game thinking about open education and other issues. His
current series about 25 years of ed tech is awesome.

Whose blog would you recommend to follow? Use some form of course
communication to share your ideas.

#### **Summary**

Participating in any community has benefits and challenges. Exploration
and experimentation with a new community is one way to approach future
participation. See how it goes, confirm whether or not there is a
reciprocal relationship in terms of sharing and contributing for you. An
ideal community of open is local, and face-to-face with opportunities to
meet regularly. Digital communities can be satisfying, and may in some
ways feel safer with a new topic such as open education. There are many
in PreK-12 and post-secondary organizations that do not understand open
practice very well and that can seem unexpectedly dangerous. As a
practitioner using open concepts, and a potential advocate, you may find
resistance to concepts of open from colleagues and administrators. You
will often find warm and welcoming support and advice in the digital
spaces the course team is recommending, let us know how it's going!

#### **Day 2 Activity**

There are many ways to begin to connect with open community, choose one
of the following paths and see for yourself. If you're already a
blogger, connected member in some way for open community, support
others, read through discussion forum and social media posts and
encourage those that are newer to the practice of participation in this
space.

**Option A:** If you're new to the open community, create a discussion
forum post (or Twitter or blog) about what you feel you have to
contribute in terms of your practices, and what you hope to receive from
the community. Include some advice, a link to a resource that you like,
a story about your practice that you believe will have value for others
with similar practice to yours.

**Option B:** If you've been involved in open community (locally or
digitally) for a while, connect with those that are new and begin a
conversation about what you have in common. Share a story about your
experiences with others in the community, what you have contributed,
what you have gained as part of the two-way street of community of
practice.

As with all daily activities for this course, any delivery method that
we can link, share, Tweet, and otherwise post and share including text,
images, audio, video are welcomed. You also have the option of privately
creating daily activities and sharing them with Jenni if you're aiming
for a badge but don't want to post publicly.

#### **Explore More**

Explore and join the Creative Commons Open Education Platform,
[CCOpenEdu](https://creativecommons.org/2017/09/05/invitation-join-cc-open-education-platform/).

Learn more about the fantastic ROER4D research project, [Research on
Open Educational Resources for Development](http://roer4d.org/).

Sign up for a [Twitter](https://twitter.com/) account. Getting started
with Twitter by Anson Alexander, 15 minute video
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Js9vuL94ess

[WordPress.com](https://wordpress.com/) provides free basic blog
hosting.

The course team's highest recommendation for a supportive vendor (if you
have around \$50USD per year) is [Reclaim
Hosting](https://reclaimhosting.com/) with a WordPress instance.

Start a blog on [Weebly](https://www.weebly.com/websites) (and watch the
20 minute video) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v81nRa_W9Fk

#### **References**

Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral
participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

MacKinnon, T., Pasfield-Neofitou, S., Manns, H., & Grant, S. (2016). A
meta-analysis of open educational communities of practice and
sustainability in higher educational policy., Alsic, 19(1)
http://journals.openedition.org/alsic/2908

Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and
identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wikipedia (n.d.). Community of practice. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community_of_practice

#### **Attribution**

All content for *Making Sense of Open Education Day 2* by Jenni Hayman
is licensed with a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license
(unless otherwise indicated with citation and/or attribution).
