### **Day Four - Types of OER**

#### **Intention**

The purpose of this module is to provide you with an opportunity to
explore the following:

-   The variety of teaching resources that can be OER

-   Preliminary information on where to find OER

-   File types and tools to edit them

#### **Introduction**

When educators talk about open educational resources, they are talking
about a wide spectrum of resources. These might include videos, audio
files, open textbooks, articles, open courseware (small or large-scale
online course designs), images, illustrations, simulations, assessments
of all kinds, formative or summative exam questions, and more, and more.
Related to the discussion of the evolution of open education, many of
these resources were originally designed as learning objects, with the
idea that they might be reused in a variety of remixed contexts.

OER Commons and Merlot are very large repositories that contain a wide
variety of smaller OER such as worksheets, quiz questions, simulations,
etc. Take some time to explore smaller resources and see the types of
file formats available in your discipline.

#### **OER Toolkit**

The following content is adapted from the [Faculty OER
Toolkit](https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/facultyoertoolkit/) by BCcampus
published under [a CC-BY 4.0 International
license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

There are a multitude of OER out there from which to choose, including
textbooks, courses, multimedia, and supplementary materials. These can
be found searching regular search engines (like Google) by using certain
keywords but it is much easier to find them through dedicated OER
repositories or websites. The examples below are just a sampling of such
repositories and websites.

#### **Repositories**

[OER Commons](https://www.oercommons.org/) - A large collection of a
variety of types of OER, including textbooks, courses, and ancillary
materials.

[Creative Commons Search](https://search.creativecommons.org/) - A
repository of various types of media, including images, music, and
videos.

[MERLOT](https://www.merlot.org/merlot/index.htm) - \"A curated
collection of free and open online teaching, learning, and faculty
development services contributed and used by an international education
community.\"

[Mason OER Metafinder
(MOM)](https://mason.deepwebaccess.com/mason__MasonLibrariesOpenEducationResources_5f4/desktop/en/search.html) -
a multi-repository search engine created by George Mason University
Libraries.

[OER Handbook for Educators](http://wikieducator.org/OER_Handbook) - \"A
guide for those who are just getting started in the creation of open
educational resources (OER).\"

[SOL\*R](https://solr.bccampus.ca/wp/) (Shareable Online Learning
Resources) - This is BCcampus\'s OER respository.

#### **Textbooks**

eCampusOntario\'s [Open Textbook
Library](https://openlibrary.ecampusontario.ca/) page is an excellent
place to begin searching for open textbooks to use in a variety of small
and large-scale post-secondary courses. Open textbooks can be
downloaded, adapted and shared in part (one or more chapters) or in
whole.

[OpenStax](http://cnx.org/) - Supported by Rice University, OpenStax has
a huge collection of open, peer-reviewed textbooks on a large variety of
subjects.

[Project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/) - A collection of tens of
thousands of digitized books available for download; audiobooks are also
available.

[AU Press](https://onlineacademiccommunity.uvic.ca/openedresources/) -
Athabasca University\'s AU Press publishes open access journals and
books with a focus on Canada, the North American West, and the
Circumpolar North.

#### **Digital Courses**

[Saylor Academy](https://www.saylor.org/) - A non-profit organization
committed to providing free and open online courses.

[Open Washington](http://www.openwa.org/category/course-materials/)
(State of Washington in the U.S.) has a great selection of courseware
search options.

Khan Academy - A collection of instructional videos and practice
exercises on topics including math, science, programming, history,
English, economics, and standardized test prep.

[MIT OpenCourseWare](https://ocw.mit.edu/index.htm) - Offers free access
to almost all MIT course content.

#### **Multimedia**

[Creative Commons Search](https://search.creativecommons.org/) - A
repository of various types of media, including images, music, and
videos.

[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com/) - and [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/)
Videos with a CC license can be found through Advanced Search options.

[LibraVox](https://librivox.org/) - a huge collection of public domain
books read aloud by LibraVox community members. Downloadable, public
domain.

[Flickr: Creative Commons](https://www.flickr.com/creativecommons/) -
Flickr is an \"online photo management and sharing application\" and
many photos are available under CC licenses; Flickr allows searching by
type of license.

[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/) - an image website feature high
resolution images available with no attribution required (although it is
nice to attribute)

[Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/) - a collection of public domain images.
You can become a Pixabay member and contribute to the collection.

#### **Supplemental Materials**

Supplemental, or ancillary, OER materials can include lecture notes,
lesson plans, slideshow presentations, assignments, or activities.

[PhET](https://phet.colorado.edu/) - Includes interactive math and
science simulations with lesson plans and activities.

[OER Commons](https://www.oercommons.org/) - A large collection of a
variety of types of OER, including textbooks, courses, and ancillary
materials.

#### **Other OER lists**

Many colleges and universities have research guides related to finding
OER and that provide lists of various repositories and resources, so be
sure to check your home institution. There is great value in curating a
discipline-specific list of OER, and so some of those will be
highlighted here. If you Google (discipline topic) and OER, you're
likely to find someone already building a curated list. The following
sites are open for all to browse:

-   CCCOER Discipline-specific Lists

-   Humanities OER - https://nmc.libguides.com/oer/humanities

-   Philosophy OER - http://libguides.humboldt.edu/openedu/phil

-   Music OER - http://libguides.cu-portland.edu/OER/music

-   Biology OER - https://guides.ou.edu/OER/biology

-   Queen\'s University - Research Guide

-   Queen\'s University - OER for K-12 Teachers

**end of Faculty OER Toolkit content**

#### **You've Downloaded some Resources - Now What?**

##### **Common File Types and Tools for Editing**

One of the course team's favourite resources is a website called
[AlternativeTo](https://alternativeto.net/). The purpose of this website
is to provide you with ideas for alternative software to edit and create
different types of files. Many of the options in AlternativeTo are open
or no-cost solutions. There are many, many great options there if your
computer does not have a suite of professional software (such as
Microsoft Office and Adobe Pro). There are also a lot of creative types
of software for building interactive and colourful learning experiences.
Check it all out!

OER are not truly OER if they cannot be adapted (edited) to suit your
local context or learner needs. In order to accomplish editing, the
creator of the OER needs to provide the resource in an editable format
(as well as other formats if they desire).

While PDFs are a very common form of output for document management,
they are not very useful as editable documents. Their purpose is to
create an image of text to ensure fidelity of design and printing. This
makes them difficult to "scrape" for content. It's good open practice to
keep this in mind when adapting and sharing resources. Avoid PDFs.

Using this link: [Sustainability of Digital Formats: Planning for
Library of Congress
Collections](https://www.loc.gov/preservation/digital/formats/fdd/browse_list.shtml).
You can explore the Library of Congress (United States) listing of
digital file formats with deeper explanations.

**Here are some common files you might encounter:**

**Text with and text with Images** - might be .txt, .rtf, .doc, .docx,
Google Docs, etc. (AlternativeTO has a great listing of options for
alternatives to Microsoft Word). Most computers come with a basic form
of text editing software.

**Images** - .jpg, .png, .tiff (most computers come with a built in
version of image opening and editing software)

**Audio** - .mp3, .wav, .wma, .mid, .ogg (Audacity is a great open tool
for opening, editing, and converting audio files
[https://www.audacityteam.org](https://www.audacityteam.org/) )

**Video** - .mp4, .mov, .avi, .flv, .wmv (VLC from VideoLan is a great
option for reading and converting video files
<https://www.videolan.org/vlc/> )

#### **Summary**

OER are not just open textbooks and open courseware, there are so many
different small and large ways to find and use them in your practice.
Use of editing software may require a learning curve, but in most cases
if you don't know how to use an open software, there's a YouTube video
for it. Experiment, play around, edit, and share your work. Time
invested in adapting OER typically provides returns in your capacity to
localize and contextualized materials for your learners' specific needs.
It also increases your capacity to contribute OER for others to use.

#### **Day 4 Activity**

##### **Jump right in!**

In today's activity you should jump right in and give the adaptation
process a try. Search one of the repositories listed in the module,
download an OER, adapt it in some way that's fun or useful for you in
your teaching and share it with others. Avoid OER with a license that
uses ND (no derivatives), but for the rest, just give it a go and post
it in the discussion forum, on Twitter, in a blog post, or keep it for
your own learning (see where you are by the end of the course).

#### **Explore More**

There's enough exploring built into the this module.

#### **References**

Embedded within the module.

#### **Attribution**

All content for Making Sense of Open Education Day 4 by Jenni Hayman is
licensed with a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode)
license (unless otherwise indicated with citation and/or attribution).
