#### **Day 3 - Tracing Themes in Open Education Research**

#### **Intention**

The purpose of this module is to provide you with an opportunity to
explore the following:

-   Historical roots of current interpretations and practices of open
    education in research

-   Connections and gaps between roots

-   Implications of these findings on current understandings of and
    practices in open education

#### **Module Designer**

##### **Irwin DeVries, PhD**

I\'m Adjunct Faculty with the [School of
Education](https://www.tru.ca/edsw/education.html) at Thompson Rivers
University, and Associate Faculty with the School of Education and
Technology at [Royal Roads University](http://set.royalroads.ca/). My
roles have included instructional designer, instructor, program
developer, administrator and musician in open and distance learning.
Since I call myself an open educator, I have no choice but to be open.
Simple!!

#### **Introduction**

How might a sense of history help your future work? There is an
increasingly widespread concern about the lack of a historical
understanding of the history and roots of open education, with the
implication that many new developments are unnecessarily "reinventing"
longstanding ideas and findings, as well as missing out on a deeper
understanding of the field based on its historical concerns and social
underpinnings. The image below is taken from a brief article from Sandra
Peter and Markus Deimann (2013). The article is an approximate
ten-minute read and provides a good preliminary foundation for the
balance of this module.

![complex timeline diagram depicting population in billions on the left,
and a variety of open education concepts across the bottom. These
include student universities, coffee houses, self-education societies,
university of london external system, miners\' libraries, open
university, university of south africa, iTunesU, open learn, MIT OCW,
MOOCs, MIT/edX](media/image4.png){width="6.5in"
height="4.291666666666667in"}

![image of a megaphone indicating important
content](media/image1.png){width="0.8333333333333334in"
height="0.8333333333333334in"}

Download and read the following article: On the role of openness in
education: A historical reconstruction

#### **Overview**

Open education or open educational practices have a wider variety of
definitions in the research. For example: Ehlers and Conole (2010) focus
mainly on content in the form of open educational resources: "OEPs
constitute the range of practices around the creation, use, and
management of open educational resources with the intent to improve
quality and innovate education." In contrast, Hogan, Carlson and Kirk
(2015) make reference to OEP as a striving for 'radically higher
academic level in learners, to use OER to develop networked learners who
can self-organize, co-create, innovate, and peer validate," emphasizing
pedagogical possibilities enhanced by OEP. Cronin's (2017) definition of
OEP further emphasizes such aspects as collaboration, participation and
learner empowerment, encompassing "...collaborative practices that
include the creation, use, and reuse of OER, as well as pedagogical
practices employing participatory technologies and social networks for
interaction, peer - learning, knowledge creation, and empowerment of
learner."

Each of these definitions captures a certain piece of the puzzle, but
the puzzle remains and definitions of open education are essentially
negotiated and emergent. However, we do know that it is closely
associated with a number of themes, as noted above, including such
aspects as networked learning, empowered learners more in control of
their own learning, collaborative learning practices, participatory
technologies, use of open educational resources (OER), with these and
more being discussed throughout this mini-MOOC.

![illustration of multiple puzzle pieces with open education at the
centre and networked learning, rep, empowered learners, oer,
participatory technologies, and collaborative practice written on the
remaining puzzle pieces](media/image5.png){width="6.166666666666667in"
height="4.722222222222222in"}

[Puzzle
background](https://pixabay.com/en/puzzle-share-piecing-together-play-977236/)
from Pixabay, overlay of concepts by Jenni Hayman, Public Domain

This day is built around research that was recently published in Open
Praxis journal. The published article abstract reads:

"The term open education has recently been used to refer to topics such
as Open Educational Resources (OERs) and Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOCs). Historically its roots lie in civil approaches to education and
open universities, but this research is rarely referenced or
acknowledged in current interpretations. In this article the antecedents
of the modern open educational movement are examined, as the basis for
connecting the various strands of research. Using a citation analysis
method the key references are extracted and their relationships mapped.
This work reveals eight distinct sub-topics within the broad open
education area, with relatively little overlap. The implications for
this are discussed and methods of improving inter-topic research are
proposed" (Weller, Jordan, DeVries & Rolfe, 2018).

Drawing upon this research, Weller and Jordan (2017) published a
handbook based titled "[Openness and education: A beginners
guide](https://www.slideshare.net/GO-GN/openness-and-education-a-beginners-guide)."
This publication is designed to expose researchers in the field, and
especially graduate students and early-career scholars, to the richness
and depth of open education research going back a half-decade and more.
It should be noted that this is a survey of research citations, not a
more comprehensive history of open education in its various emerging
forms, such as has been undertaken by Peter and Diemann (2013) and
others.

#### **What is "citation analysis"?**

Citation analysis is a process of analyzing references from an initial
body of research literature, looking for multiple linkages among cited
research and then repeating the process over multiple iterations. This
data is then mapped out into citation clusters, after processing in
software (Gephi) that graphically arranges the data into a map (Figure
1). The following eight themes emerged in the referenced research above:

-   Open practice

-   Open educational resources

-   E-learning

-   Distance education and open learning

-   Open education in schools

-   MOOCs

-   Social media

-   Open access publishing

![diagram showing nodes and strength of connections between the 8 themes
of the academic article under
discussion](media/image3.png){width="6.5in"
height="4.208333333333333in"}

Figure 1: Citation analysis map (Weller et al., 2018)

Research themes emerged both as clusters and as time ordered items,
among other possibilities, the latter seen in a simplified form in this
graphic:

![another form of timeline this one vertical running from 1970 to 2010
in ten year increments. Items included are open education in schools,
distance ed and open learning, elearning and online ed, open access
publishing, OER, open practices, social media moocs, each of the
categories gets smaller based on how recent it
is](media/image2.png){width="6.5in"
height="6.152777777777778in"}![another form of timeline this one
vertical running from 1970 to 2010 in ten year increments. Items
included are open education in schools, distance ed and open learning,
elearning and online ed, open access publishing, OER,
](media/image6.png){width="6.5in" height="6.152777777777778in"}

Figure 2: Timeline (Jordan and Weller, 2017)

#### **More on the themes**

Following is a brief survey, in point form, of each of the eight themes.

##### **Open practice**

-   One of the most recent and ongoing areas for research in the field

-   Definitions remain diverse and emergent

-   Prominent themes of connection to social media, open access
    publishing, OER, digital scholarly practices, open educational
    practices (research and teaching)

##### **Open educational resources**

-   Emerges around 2000

-   Began with learning objects, moved toward open source, open
    courseware

-   Links to E-learning, distance education

-   Influencing MOOCs and pushes toward open practices

-   A central force in the network

##### **E-learning**

-   1990s, 2000s

-   Related to technology-enhanced learning, web-based technologies,
    etc.

-   Maintained focus on pedagogy with technology

-   Gained interest of educators beyond open universities

##### **Distance education and open learning**

-   1980s onward

-   Growth of open and distance universities

-   Included gradual shift to "open learning" - learner-centered
    pedagogy, fewer barriers

##### **Open education in schools**

-   Main focus in early 1970s - many early moves toward less
    stratification, streaming, elitism in education

-   Examples:

    -   Plowden Report UK (1967)

    -   US Open Schools

-   "Child centered" -- individualization, discovery learning

-   Curriculum freedom by teachers

-   Access, flexiblility (locations, hours, open classroom
    configurations)

##### **MOOCs**

-   Most recent theme in the network

-   Relationship to "openness" not clear

-   Some shared connection with OER and e-learning

##### **Social media**

-   From mid 2000s

-   Web 2.0, blogging, communication

-   Moving toward open tools

##### **Open access publishing**

-   Later 1990s

-   Not strongly linked to other themes

-   Focused more on higher research than teaching

-   Important contributor to digital scholarship

#### **Summary**

The primary take-away for this module is the concept that modern
education practice may seem completely new and leading edge. It is often
new for individual practitioners and institutions. Taking time as a
scholarly practitioner to examine past research, and to gain an
understanding of the deeper history as well, has great value when
creating "new" frameworks. All human learning, all ways of collaborative
learning have strong ties and important roots in history, theory, and
research. It's worth digging around to examine the rich soil in which
seedlings of new practice grow.

#### **Day 3 Activities**

**Activity 1:** "I didn't know what I didn't know."

Consider the following topics related to your practice:Areas of low
connection ("islands")

-   Open education in schools

-   MOOCs

-   Distance education

-   Open learning

-   E-learning

Reflect and write down your thoughts about the ways that any two or more
of these themes be related and relevant to your practice. What makes the
concepts related, what separates them? How might your concept of open
education be informed by considering these themes and integrating
related bodies of knowledge with current practices?

**Activity 2:** Can you diagram or illustrate your reflection and ideas?

#### **Explore More**

Select any of these references for this module and read the full
version, or suggest other readings that will enhance or shed new light
on this lesson. Complementary, alternative or opposing views are
welcome.

Jordan, K., & Weller, M. (2017). Openness and education: a beginner's
guide. Global OER Graduate Network. http://oro.open.ac.uk/53028/

Peter, S., & Deimann, M. (2013). [On the role of openness in education:
A historical
reconstruction](https://www.openpraxis.org/index.php/OpenPraxis/article/view/23).
*Open Praxis*, *5*(1), 7-14.

Weller, M., Jordan, K., DeVries, I., & Rolfe, V. (2018). Mapping the
open education landscape: citation network analysis of historical open
and distance education research. *Open Praxis*, *10*(2), 109-126.
Retrieved from
https://openpraxis.org/index.php/OpenPraxis/article/view/822/445

#### **Additional References**

Cronin, C. (2017). [Openness and Praxis: Exploring the Use of Open
Educational Practices in Higher
Education](http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/3096/4301).
*The International Review Of Research In Open And Distributed Learning*,
*18*(5). doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v18i5.3096

Ehlers, U., & Conole, G. C. (2010). [Open Educational Practices:
Unleashing the power of
OER](https://oerknowledgecloud.org/sites/oerknowledgecloud.org/files/OEP_Unleashing-the-power-of-OER.pdf).
In UNESCO Workshop on OER in Namibia 2010.

Hogan, P., Carlson, B. R., & Kirk, C. (2015). Open Educational
Practices' Models using Open Educational Resources. Retrieved from
http://commons.nmu.edu/facwork_conferencepaper

#### **Attribution**

*Day 3 of Making Sense of Open Education* by Irwin DeVries is licensed
under a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.
