### Day 8 - Tooling Around in the Open

![image of a person holding a paint brush and a pencil with
multi-coloured paint spread
around](media/image3.jpg){width="6.347222222222222in"
height="4.222222222222222in"}

Photo by [Alice
Achterhof](https://unsplash.com/photos/FwF_fKj5tBo?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

#### Intention

The purpose of this module is to provide you with an opportunity to:

-   Explore a few tools that can be used to create and provide Open
    Education Resources

-   Experience a few tools that can be used in Open Educational
    Practices

-   Collect and share ideas and uses for Open Tools

#### **Who's "Creating" Today's Module?**

Hi! I'm Terry Greene. I'm a Program Manager at eCampusOntario (on
secondment from Fleming College, where I'm a learning technology
specialist). I am no super expert in Open Tools. I'll point you to
others who are not just using, but creating, open tools. I certainly am
an enthusiastic user of open tools, though. You'll realize why
"creating" is in quotation marks in the section header in a moment. A
little hint: it's because being open is awesome. You can find me on
Twitter \@greeneterry

#### 

#### **What are Open Tools?**

We could probably debate for days what constitutes open and what
constitutes a tool. Put those together and we have ourselves a lot of
arguing to do. So let's keep it simple. For this module, an open tool is
some kind of software/program/thing that you can use for free, with no
time limit, without providing a credit card number and which does not
limit what you can take out of it. Maybe you need to give up an email
address.

There are great "free" tools out there that you can make amazing visual
elements and what not with, but if at some point they want some money
from you to get the sweet stuff, they are not invited to our Open Tool
party/module. Feel "free" to use them, though!

Now, here is the reason why, as it turns out, I am not the one who is
really going to tell you much of anything about Open Tools myself. This
is an experience of one of the massive benefits of the open education
movement: People, like, share stuff! When I sat down to create a module
on Tools for Open Education, I thought "Huh, maybe someone has done this
before. I'll tweet out a query." And here is what happened:

![](media/image2.png){width="5.097222222222222in"
height="6.069444444444445in"}

https://twitter.com/greeneterry/status/999383401982517248

And guess what? The module created by [JR
Dingwall](https://twitter.com/JRDingwall), Instructional Designer at the
University of Saskatchewan's Distance Education Unit, covered not only
what I was looking for, he did it far better than I could have done.
It's a web presentation that he created for the Alberta Open Educational
Resources (OER) Summit 2017.

So we are going to head over to the site he created to enjoy his work on
OER tools and then come back here to do an Open Tool activity.

One side note, JR has chosen a nice mix of open tools, including some
very interesting independent ed-tech. He even made the site itself with
an indie ed-tech tool known as a SPLOT (read a little about them here:
<http://splot.ca/about/>). You just need to know one little inside joke:
There's purposely no consensus on what SPLOT stands for, it just
generally means a small, open tool that just does one thing with no
bloat. If you think of an LMS that has 47 tools in it; this is like one
of those tools, only actually useful. You can decide for yourself what
SPLOT stands for. The title of every page of JR's OER Tool module
includes a variation of SPLOT. He's Simply Providing Lexical Options To
(you).

Ready? Head on over to JR's site to learn about some independent ed-tech
tools that help:

-   to find and share images to complement your work;

-   to create interactive content for your course materials;

-   to publish open materials like textbooks and modules.

##### **Here\'s what you\'ll see**

1.  The first page covers where to find open images and how to attribute
    the images you find

2.  The second page covers (with excellent examples) some of the content
    design and assessment tools of h5P

3.  The third page covers Pressbooks (we recommend the Pressbooks.com
    official website as a starting place, installing your own open
    instance of Pressbooks is some advanced fancy dancing)

4.  The fourth page covers examples of SPLOTs that highlight a few
    different social learning pedagogies -- generally focused on
    advanced work using Wordpress.

The examples are worth the price of admission, including the site in
which they are housed. Click this link or the image below and enjoy!
SPLOT the OER Tools

![](media/image1.png){width="6.5in" height="2.1527777777777777in"}

Don't forget to come back here once you have gone through everything!

## ![photo of a light source (likely a sparkler) waved around against a dark background to create a multi-lined light circle](media/image4.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

Photo by [Luiz
Hanfilaque](https://unsplash.com/photos/mOIzflpd-ig?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

#### Day 8 Activity: Make Something in an Open Tool

Here is what I am asking you to do as an activity for today: Using an
open tool, create an Open Educational Resource that helps newcomers to
Open Education distinguish between an open and a closed tool.

You are the master of your own domain, so we want you to do your own
thing here. You get to decide what and how to do this.

-   A single presentation slide with an open image?

-   A short [H5P](https://h5p.org/) activity?

-   A Google Doc that could be shared to other OER or into a Pressbook?

-   Submit an "Open vs Closed" activity to [The Ontario Extend Activity
    Bank](https://extend-bank.ecampusontario.ca/add/) (this is much like
    the ds106 Assignment Bank that JR mentioned.)

-   Make something with a SPLOT

You can choose to share you work in the Day 8 discussion forum, in a
chosen social media space (blog, tweet, Instagram - pop the link into
the discussion forum, too if you want!), or just save it for your own
reflection.

##### **Advanced and Cool Examples**

Before heading out into the wild and making some OER with an open tool,
let's put this in perspective to see just how far one can take this.
Head on over to [Dennis' Blogatorium](https://generaleducation.ca/), the
web space of Dennis Vanderspek, faculty member in General Arts and
Science at Fleming College. There you will see some really independent
ed-tech. If Dennis doesn't like how something works enough times, he
just makes his own program that does the thing and then shares it with
anyone openly. Now, I know that not many have the skill set to do this
(I absolutely don't), I just wanted to make what I've asked you to do
doesn\'t seem so crazy. Seriously though, check out the tools like the
BlogTron300 and marvel at the awesomeness of it all. We don't
necessarily need big corporate educational technology.

#### **Explore More**

Go back to the last page of [JR's Open
Tool](https://module13.ca/oer-tools/2017/05/07/smallest-possible-online-living-technology/)
site and follow some of the links to see how open tools have been used.
Also pop back over to Dennis' Blogatorium and explore his other home
made ed-tech like [YodaPad](https://generaleducation.ca/amp-pad/), the
program inspired by AODA legislation!

Also, let's explore together right now! Other than SPLOTs, H5P and
Pressbooks, what Open Tools do you know and use? Post to the discussion
board or Tweet to the
[#MakingSense18](https://twitter.com/hashtag/MakingSense18?src=hash)
your suggestions for further exploration of Open Tools.

#### **Resources**

https://module13.ca/oer-tools

http://splot.ca/

#### **Attribution**

Content for *Making Sense of Open Education Day 8* by Terry Greene is
licensed with a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license
(unless otherwise indicated with citation and/or attribution).
