# **Day Nine: Inclusive Design for OER**

![\"Please come in\" sign indicating a welcome to the module for
all](media/image4.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.333333333333333in"}

#### **Intention**

The purpose of this module is to provide you with an opportunity to
explore:

-   The basic tenets and principles of of Inclusive Design and Universal
    Design for Learning (UDL)

-   Inclusive design practices and strategies for selecting, creating
    and using OER

#### **Today's Module - With a Little Help From My Friends**

Hi, I'm Joanne Kehoe, coming at you from eCampusOntario where I work as
a Program Manager. I'm on secondment from McMaster University, where
I've spent 20 (gulp!) years working in various teaching and learning
departments, including most recently as an Instructional Designer. Part
of my work at Mac involves membership on our Accessibility Committee as
well as our OER Committee, where I have the opportunity to interact with
impassioned educators working towards more inclusive and open education
for our learners. I'm no expert by any means, but many people are and
we'll tap into to some of the wonderful, open resources they've created.
Being open and inclusive go together like bacon and eggs, bubbles and
baths, Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers - together they have the power to
satisfy, inspire and dazzle us all.

#### **What do we mean by Inclusive Design?**

We've all likely heard the words, "make yourself at home," while as a
guest in someone's house. Sometimes we feel comfortable enough to say,
pick up a magazine and read it, but it may take a while to reach the
level of opening the fridge and making yourself a Dagwood sandwich.
Being inclusive is cultivating that "I'm at home in another person's
home" experience. Creating that inclusive atmosphere isn't as simple as
saying you're inclusive, it is about inclusiveness as a daily practice,
so it is natural and a part of you. Inclusive design in education is
just that - it is enmeshed in your work, not an add-on you tack on down
the road.

You may be more familiar with the terms universal design for learning
(UDL) and accessible design than inclusive design and all three will be
referred to and included as guideposts for the resources and references
in this module. All are about access - access which aims to bring all
diverse individuals in rather than shutting them out. The difference
between inclusive design and accessible design is that the latter
sometimes involves tweaking an original design to make it suitable for a
group of users, whereas inclusive design considers all users throughout
the design process . An example might be a watch that is designed in
such a way that it can be read by touch, sight and an auditory cue
versus a watch that is designed in one way with a secondary version
designed for visually impaired users having braille for the numbers.

When you're designing - whether it be a 'thing' or an experience - it is
critical to think about all of your users - and this means everyone's
needs and abilities are considered. Inclusive design is just that - it
includes those considerations right from the start. It is "design that
considers the full range of human diversity with respect to ability,
language, culture, gender, age and other forms of human difference."
(IDRC, 2018).

#### **Universal Design for Learning (UDL)**

Inclusive design can trace its roots back to Universal Design for
Learning (UDL), which was developed by T[he Centre for Applied Special
Technology (CAST)](http://www.cast.org/) back in the early 1990s. CAST
has developed the Universal Design for Learning framework to help
educators remove all barriers for all learners when designing their
teaching and learning activities. It is guided by the following three
principles:

> Principle 1: Multiple Means of Representation
>
> Principle 2: Multiple Means of Expression
>
> Principle 3: Multiple Means of Engagement

![Illustration of the principles Universal Design for Learning, being
multiple means of representation, multiple means of expression and
multiple means of engagement.](media/image5.jpg){width="6.5in"
height="4.875in"}

CAST provides an online UDL guidelines tool that expands on these three
principles as well as giving educators suggestions that can be
implemented into their curriculum design and supporting materials,
including open educational resources. The following image is a snapshot
of these guidelines - if you click and follow the link you will be able
to really dig in.

![Chart linked to CAST framework showing how educators can provide
different options for the principles of
UDL](media/image1.png){width="6.5in" height="4.833333333333333in"}

#### **What are the Dimensions of Inclusive Design?**

![Aerial image of a carnival to illustrate the multiple points of entry
and pathways an experience can take.](media/image6.jpg){width="6.5in"
height="6.5in"}

Inclusive design differs slightly from UDL in that rather than design
something that can be universally used by all, inclusive design taps
into the power of the digital realm which makes a more personalized "one
size fits one" approach possible. Inclusive design means that while all
are considered, there can be multiple entry points and pathways
depending on an individual's needs. It's kind of like entering a
carnival from a number of available ticket booths and carving your own
pathway through the games, rides, food and attractions in a way that
suits you (I'm partial to Skeeball, Tilt-A-Whirl, pogos and demolition
derbies FYI).

![The dimensions of inclusive design - inclusive process and tools,
recognizing diversity and uniqueness and broader beneficial impact and
how you can utilize these.impact.](media/image3.png){width="6.5in"
height="5.666666666666667in"}

The above graphic was developed by the [Inclusive Design Research
Centre](http://idrc.ocad.ca/) at [OCAD University](http://www.ocadu.ca/)
whose work centres around the three dimensions of inclusive design,
which are:

-   Recognize diversity and uniqueness

-   Inclusive process and tools

-   Broader beneficial impact

These dimensions are beautifully expanded upon in their [Inclusive
Design Guide](https://guide.inclusivedesign.ca/) which is segmented into
four parts; Insights, Practices, Tools and Activities which offer
practical methods you can integrate and learn from. Watch this two
minute video to get a taste of what the Guide offers:

![Inclusive Design Guide](media/image2.jpg){width="6.5in"
height="4.875in"}

It is important to keep in mind that this module is a very brief
introduction -- to get a comprehensive look at how to create inclusive
educational resources, the [Floe: Inclusive Learning Design
Handbook](https://handbook.floeproject.org/) developed by the Inclusive
Design Research Centre at OCAD University is your continually-evolving
go-to. As one of the project team members (and a fantastic person to add
to your open learning network) [Jess
Mitchell](https://twitter.com/jesshmitchell) advises, you should read
through it and while you're doing this, challenge any assumptions you
have and try to re-see what you can do to adapt your practice.

#### **Inclusive Design and OER**

An inclusive learning experience involves content, activities and
resources that fit and can be adapted to everyone's unique needs. Using
open education resources (OER) can greatly enrich this by adding diverse
and flexible options for learners. However, not all OER are designed in
an inclusive manner. Through the magic of the 5 R's of Open Education,
you are empowered to be able to modify or transform resources in a
multitude of ways. However, there are OER that have been created in
inflexible, proprietary formats that make creating derivatives
challenging.

Here's a great tutorial from the Teach Access Initiative that introduces
you to the basics of developing and building inclusive learning
experiences: <https://teachaccess.github.io/tutorial/#/4>

#### **Tech-know how on creating inclusive OER or make the open work of others inclusive**

If you've started here, wander back and look at the resources in the
earlier sections as both the principles of UDL and the dimensions of
inclusive design sections all should give you approaches and
methodologies that you should keep in mind when creating or adapting
OER. Technically speaking, there are a variety of formats an OER can
take. The [BC Open Accessibility
Toolkit](https://opentextbc.ca/accessibilitytoolkit/) is an open
resource that takes a look at the more common types and guides you on
how you might create an inclusive derivative of the following:

-   Images/Charts/Graphs/Maps

-   Tables

-   Weblinks

-   Multimedia

-   [Formulas](https://opentextbc.ca/accessibilitytoolkit/chapter/formulas/)
    (math and scientific)

-   Font size

-   Colour contrast

Using information from the toolkit, follow along to see a checklist of
recommendations to make the above resources more accessible

And if you're starting from scratch in building an OER, congrats! As
we've learned, building in an inclusive design approach from step one is
optimum. The inclusive design approach can sometimes be easier than
retro-fitting other's work.

For other types of OER, we encourage you to take a look at the resources
contained in the "Explore More" section.

#### **Day 9 Activity (Choice)**

##### **Option One:**

Web Accessibility Tools: Take a look at the [Accessibility Assessment
Tools](https://handbook.floeproject.org/AccessibilityAssessmentTools.html)
located in the Floe: Inclusive Design Handbook around Authoring,
Checking Code or Checking Colour. You can also go deeper by looking at
the multitude of [web accessibility
tools](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ER/tools/) available from the W3C.

Next, choose one (or more) OERs and check it using some of the tools.
How well did it perform accessibility-wise? Was there anything about
your results that could be done to make the resource more inclusive?

##### **Option Two:**

Developing a Persona - [The Inclusive Design
Guide](https://guide.inclusivedesign.ca/tools/Personas.html) includes an
activity on developing personas to help identify users of a design.
Think about an OER you might want to develop and create a persona (or
personas) for it, using the steps outlined in the guide. Then, reflect
on how you would design with these personas in mind and any
considerations you would include in that process.

##### **Option Three:**

Creating an Inclusive OER

Adding an image to Flickr - If you have a Flickr account, take/share and
upload a picture to your account, using an open license. Using
recommendations for
[images](https://opentextbc.ca/accessibilitytoolkit/chapter/imageschartsgraphsmaps/)
from the [BC Open Accessibility
Toolkit](https://opentextbc.ca/accessibilitytoolkit/chapter/imageschartsgraphsmaps/)
articulate what the image functions and alt-text would be.

With any of the three options, you can choose to share your work in the
Day 9 discussion forum, in a chosen social media space (blog, tweet,
Instagram), or just save it for your own reflection.

#### **Explore More**

Inclusive Design Toolkit (Cambridge University)

Inclusive Learning Design Handbook

WCAG (Web Content Accessibility Guidelines).

#### **References**

IDRC: Inclusive Design Research Centre. (2018). What is Inclusive
Design.
https://idrc.ocadu.ca/about-the-idrc/49-resources/online-resources/articles-and-papers/443-whatisinclusivedesign

#### **Image and Document Credits (listed in order of appearance)**

"Please Come In" Photo by [Artem
Bali](https://unsplash.com/photos/Ig4UvpKDyMg?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

"Universal Design for Learning from Center for Applied Special
Technology" by Giulia Forsythe <https://flic.kr/p/eSi6cV> via the Public
Domain.

CAST (2018). Universal Design for Learning Guidelines version 2.2.
Retrieved from http://udlguidelines.cast.org

"Aerial" Photo by
[chuttersnap](https://unsplash.com/photos/TVfVo1pga9s?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

#### **Attribution**

Content for Making Sense of Open Education Day 9 by Joanne Kehoe is
licensed with a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license
(unless otherwise indicated with citation and/or attribution).
