## **Day 13 - Advocacy**

![photo of a microphone on a microphone
stand](media/image1.jpg){width="6.25in" height="4.166666666666667in"}

Photo by [Elliot
Sloman](https://unsplash.com/photos/4TodkZIJkrY?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

#### **Intentions**

The purpose of today's module is to provide some information and ideas
towards inspiring your own open advocacy in your local context(s) so
that you can:

-   Communicate the value of OER and OEP at your institution across
    multiple stakeholder groups

-   Establish yourself as a open leader and advocate on your campus

-   Create and apply an action plan to help you guide your efforts

#### **Who's "Creating" Today's Module?**

My name is Claire Coulter and I am an instructional technologist at the
University of Guelph. My work in the "open" has often been off the side
of my desk, which has made it a bit of an unwieldy beast at times. That
being said, in my work with eCampus Ontario as an "Open Ranger" (yay
#OEORangers !), and together with my partner in crime, Ali Versluis
(UG's newly minted OER Librarian, \@aliversluis, also facilitating this
session) we have started to build some momentum on our campus. We are
not experts in OER Advocacy (yet), but hopefully this module will
provide some ideas to get you started: some practical, some
evidence-based, all with the intention to help you be thoughtful in your
work.

#### **What's Your Why?**

What does it mean to be an open advocate? And why do we care?

As part of this mini-MOOC, we were each asked to craft a message
answering the question "Why Open Makes Sense to Me." It is a helpful
question to ask yourself. We each have our own unique stories, but we
also share a lot in common. Recently, at the Creative Commons Global
Summit, some of us engaged here facilitated a [storytelling
session](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1M9rhHolwEoqiRz5PgfFHr8qR-6mVutAfLU6sK_jdP3I/edit?usp=sharing)
to help foster connections, to grow our networks, and to help identify
our commonalities. Think about what your story is, and be prepared to
tell it. You are already a leader.

More, think about what it means to be an open advocate. If you need
additional verbiage, you need only to look to the countless articles and
blog posts on the topic of open to help you find the words to enhance
your "why." And the great thing about the open community is that we LOVE
sharing, and so as long as you provide attribution (or whatever relevant
CC license applies) we are more than happy to help you find the words!

Lastly, Petrides, Levin, and Watson (2018) suggest a framework of CARE
that is helpful in thinking about the ways that we can work together to
sustain the OER movement. It is a means to think about a set of norms
and practices that we should all share as open advocates (or in the case
of their position, "stewards"). You can read the blog post discussing
their framework
[here](https://careframework.org/2018/03/04/toward-a-sustainable-oer-ecosystem-the-care-framework/).

![diagram with OER stewards at the centre with the words contribute,
attribute, release, and empower surrounding
it](media/image4.png){width="4.777777777777778in" height="3.375in"}

"CARE Framework" is licensed under a [Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).

#### **Do Your Homework**

![photo of a computer with a lot of stickers and a textbook on a
bed](media/image6.jpg){width="5.611111111111111in" height="4.5in"}

Photo by [Kiana
Bosman](https://unsplash.com/photos/JK5ZDil7NV4?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

While various educational systems share many commonalities, it is no
great revelation to suggest that institutional contexts can be wildly
different. If you are interested in being an open advocate, this first
place to start is to do your homework. What we mean by this, is that it
is important to attempt to learn all that you can about your
institutional context. The old adage "knowledge is power" will serve you
well. So, what does this mean in practice? Here are a few suggestions
framed as questions:

-   What are your institution's vision and mission statements? How does
    open align with these values?

-   What strategic documents can you review to better understand where
    open might fit? Is there a strategic plan, mandate agreement, or
    goals document to review? Does your institution have a teaching and
    learning plan or whitepaper that might be relevant?

-   Are there any existing movements on campus that you can align with?
    Hint: the library is a good place to start \-- they are big
    proponents of open everything! Having a good understanding of things
    such as the bookstore's role within the institution (is it revenue
    generating? cost neutral?), what undergrad advocacy initiatives have
    been undertaken (have student executives run on platforms of
    textbook/course affordability?) in the past, whether student
    retention or attraction is an issue, will help you better understand
    larger conversations across campus and how you can possibly fit OER
    into that conversation.

-   Review your campus course offerings. What courses offer an
    opportunity to move to an open textbook? Are there courses where a
    transition would be more impactful due to large enrollments, costly
    textbooks, or required completion across programs?

-   Be aware of some of the commonly cited challenges of OER adoption.
    Understanding how these influence campus stakeholders will help you
    be prepared to provide a counterpoint to each. Do not be afraid to
    appeal to emotion by posing tough questions, but remember that data
    can be your best friend (bonus points if it is localized)!

![diagram outlining the technical, economic, social, and legal
challenges to OER](media/image5.png){width="5.027777777777778in"
height="3.8472222222222223in"}

\"[Understand the Barriers to OER
Adoption](http://tlp-lpa.ca/ld.php?content_id=33984909) by The Learning
Portal is licensed under CC-BY-NC.

#### **Find Your People**

![Photo of five people holding their fingers together at the centre to
make a star pattern](media/image3.jpg){width="4.838542213473316in"
height="3.62084208223972in"}

Photo by
[rawpixel](https://unsplash.com/photos/Eo3MptCU6qM?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

Once you have done your homework, it is very likely that through this
effort you may have identified some local folks that have a similar
belief in the power and importance of open education. If not, it is
important that you do so.

While we often talk about "open" as synonymous with "free", this is not
the case. Open advocacy costs: it requires real academic labour and it
can be both isolating and tiring. This work will often be done off the
side of your desk initially, as few institutions have mechanisms that
recognize and reward such efforts. It is therefore crucial to identify
colleagues (locally, but also beyond) that can help you to sustain your
efforts. Although there will always be a group of curmudgeons, you
should not be worried about them right now. Let them speak, maintain
your objectivity, and engage the stakeholders who are listening. These
stakeholders are often referred to as early adopters or enablers, and
they align with your why. Their ears are open, they are listening and
inquiring; they are ready to take action. At the early stages of change,
spend a high percentage of your effort with this group.

-   You will want to think if there is anyone on your campus engaged in
    this work. Does your institution have a Librarian that works with
    OER or Online/Blended/e Learning? Is there someone within a Research
    Support or Scholarly Communications team that might have Open
    included in their portfolio?

-   Are there instructors who have adopted and/or curated open education
    resources for their courses? Can you connect with them to learn more
    so that you can champion their efforts visibly and vocally?

-   Who are the instructors that are considered "innovative?" They may
    already be engaging with open education, but might not be calling it
    such a thing. Check lists of teaching award winners. These faculty
    members are known for being student-centered and creative, so it is
    very likely that they will be receptive to a conversation.

-   Do you have colleagues who are not working at your home institution,
    but are close by? Perhaps a community of practice can exist beyond
    the walls of your campus. In Ontario we are fortunate to have
    eCampus helping us to foster connections. Is there a similar
    organization near you who might act as a catalyst and connector?

-   Who can you seek out to include in your personal learning network to
    help keep you energized towards sustaining the work? Are you on
    Twitter or other social media channels? There are hundreds of open
    advocates around the globe who have formed a community of care,
    collaboration, and reciprocity.

Some of the text above is a derivative of content within [The
Champion\'s
Toolkit,](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Fyt-dhaXwvGVHKv2ZB4HtphTNYCPsfl8m68Q_xw3CdQ/edit#)
by the [Alberta OER Initiative](http://albertaoer.com/), licensed under
CC BY-NC 4.0

#### **Craft Your Message**

![photo of a bottle with a paper inside it placed on a riverbed
recreating the idea of a message in a
bottle](media/image2.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.347222222222222in"}

Photo by [Andrew
Measham](https://unsplash.com/photos/O3miWJIfZA8?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

Once you have defined your why, it is important to think about the "why"
for others on your campus. What is important for the various
stakeholders that you have identified? Remember, if you have done your
homework, you should be prepared with this information, and so craft
your messaging accordingly. Shift your mindset away from "what's in it
for me" to "what's in it for them."

WHAT'S IN IT FOR ME (Your Why) \-\-\--\>\>\> WHAT'S IN IT FOR THEM
(Their Why)

If you carefully consider your messages in advance, you are more likely
to be prepared to talk to almost anyone about your project, which is
helpful for impromptu run-ins with other interested parties at
Starbucks, at campus events, etc.

##### **Step One: Begin by Defining Your Goals**

What are your goals? Begin by defining what you want to achieve by
introducing open education at your institution. The more clear your
goals are, the easier it is for people to engage with your activities.
You cannot always be totally specific, but if you are honest with what
you want the outcome to be, and you are clear with yourself and your
constituents, you have a better chance of sharing a clear vision of your
goals.

##### **Step Two: Choose Your Audience**

It is best to craft different advocacy takeaways for each of your
stakeholder groups. When you start to consider arguments for each
stakeholder, make sure you do your homework, and spend time considering
what will help support each group.

Lastly (and luckily just in time for this course), the College Libraries
Ontario Learning Portal has some suggestions about the types of messages
that will resonate with various stakeholder groups. Check out their
[website](https://tlp-lpa.ca/oer-toolkit/advocacy) and click on Step 4
to learn more!

##### **Step Three: Craft the Message**

At the heart of any message is the piece that is going to make the
audience sit up and pay attention. The information used should be short,
factual, honest, direct, and as compelling as possible. The most obvious
message for students is the cost of textbooks, but that messaging may
not resonate with faculty who might consider the cost of textbooks as
part of the cost of education. In your message, try to avoid overtly
provocative language that will make your audience shut down or disengage
with you.

##### **Step Four: Ask for What You Want**

The "ask" or call to action is your chance to tell your audience what
you want them to do. Try to make your call to action simple, and try to
provide a "do right now" as well as a "in the long term" presentation.
For example, for faculty you could ask people to share one thing about
their teaching, but in the long term ask them to adopt open materials.
The ask needs to be specific so that your audience sees how their
investment in the goals of the mission will benefit not only themselves,
but other stakeholders. Again, the call to action part of your message
will be different depending on your audience, but be ready to clarify
with all of your audiences what you have asked for with other audiences.

![Photo of the words You Got This painted on a
sidewalk](media/image8.jpg){width="6.5in" height="3.986111111111111in"}

Photo by [sydney
Rae](https://unsplash.com/photos/geM5lzDj4Iw?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on Unsplash

#### **Step Five: Revise and be YOU!**

Ask colleagues and supporters to provide feedback on your message; be
ready for the message to change as you grow your project or program.
Finally, remember that your message should always be honest, clear,
concise, and organized. The message you craft will contain elements of
your overall goal, but it will also be a reflection of you and your
credibility is on the line when you share this message. As you revise
and refine your message, ask yourself, "Is this a true reflection of
what I want? Will people see the real intentions behind this message?"
The best messages are the ones that carry a piece of your passion for
the topic. Do not be afraid to get personal when telling your story.

Some text is derivative content within [Librarians as Open Education
Advocates](https://openedadvocates.pressbooks.com/chapter/crafting-a-message/),
page contributions by Quill West licensed under [CC-BY
4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), and based on
additional derivative content, some by Nicole Allen and SPARC,
originally published at "[SPARC
Resources](http://www.sparc.arl.org/resources)" (CC-BY 4.0).

Some text is a derivative of content within [The Champion\'s
Toolkit,](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Fyt-dhaXwvGVHKv2ZB4HtphTNYCPsfl8m68Q_xw3CdQ/edit#)
by the [Alberta OER Initiative,](http://albertaoer.com/) licensed under
CC BY-NC 4.0

#### **Talk to Everyone** 

![photo of a woman holding a megaphone
sign](media/image7.jpg){width="6.5in" height="4.347222222222222in"}

"[Humans of the Commons at the Creative Commons Global Summit
2018](https://flic.kr/p/26c8x9F)" by [Sebastiaan ter
Burg,](https://www.flickr.com/photos/ter-burg/) CC-BY 2.0

After you have created some different messages, it is time to test them
out. We suggest starting by finding existing opportunities at your
organization. Departmental meetings, Senate meetings, tables or displays
in a high traffic area, and local events or programming (such as Writing
Retreats or Teaching and Learning focused conferences) are ideal venues
to test your messages. Hitching your wagon to existing programming and
meetings will make things easier for you logistically (as you will not
have to jump through hoops to secure spaces or run your own event
promotion) and ensures that your messages are reaching a wider (and
potentially more impactful) audience. Being in front of these groups
means that you can get their attention in a more active, meaningful way,
rather than relying on more passive options like email.

That being said, there is obviously plenty of value in having in
one-on-one conversations. Engaging with folks in smaller groups allows
you to give them more of your time and they may feel more comfortable
asking questions specific to their own circumstances or need.

We cannot overestimate the importance of looking out for champions
everywhere, even in the most unlikely of places. After Open Education
Week 2018, the two of us wandered the halls of particular departments,
leaving succinct postcards in common areas for faculty members or
students to look at. If any administrative or departmental assistants
were present, we chatted with them about who we were, why we were
leaving the cards, and what we could offer support with. This resulted
in lots of great conversations \-- often these staff members had
children enrolled at the university, so they were already familiar with
the issue of course content affordability. But our conversation let them
know what options their children could pursue and how they could begin
those conversations with their instructor. We also ran into an Associate
Dean Academic during one of these hall walks and following this
conversation, he has begun to champion our goals with his instructors,
sending out emails on our behalf, and even brokering meetings between
specific instructors and ourselves with the intent of finding solutions
for the coming academic year!

In the "Champion's Toolkit," part of the Alberta OER initiative, the
following are also offered as options to increase your impact (with a
few additions from us of course!):

+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Formal       | Securing a time slot with one stakeholder group can   |
| Presentation | allow you to focus on their interests and create a    |
|              | pivotal moment of change in their perspective on OER  |
|              | and be the stepping stone to cultural change.         |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Speaking the language of those at the table or in the |
|              | audience is a foundational stepping stone to cultural |
|              | change. If you don't know who will be in the          |
|              | audience, consider them all potential champions, and  |
|              | address the interests of all stakeholder groups.      |
|              |                                                       |
|              | One way that we are doing this on our campus is by    |
|              | targeting departmental meetings. This allows us to    |
|              | take advantage of a pre-set time when a large(r)      |
|              | group of instructors are in one room, and with the    |
|              | invitation of the department chair.                   |
|              |                                                       |
|              | As mentioned above, other existing activities and     |
|              | local conferences are a great way to get the          |
|              | conversation started.                                 |
+==============+=======================================================+
| Informal     | Sharing your personal story is a great way to declare |
| Presentation | yourself as an OER champion in your community, and,   |
|              | can draw engagement and interest from people in a way |
|              | that educating and informing may not.                 |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Under this category we would include our activities   |
|              | of simply getting out there and walking the halls and |
|              | knocking on doors. While we do not want to simply     |
|              | replicate the activities of textbook sales reps, it   |
|              | is imperative that we meet instructors where they     |
|              | are, which is often in their offices!                 |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Also included in this category is the potential to    |
|              | host a "Sprint" toward OER creation, adaptation,      |
|              | curation etc.                                         |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Special      | Dedicated topic groups are a great way to gather the  |
| Interest     | right people in a room. With the right structure,     |
| Groups       | this group can collectively navigate the landscape of |
|              | change. With topics dedicated to a specific outcome,  |
|              | the individuals in the group can quickly shift into   |
|              | an empowered mindset of leadership and championship.  |
|              | In groups like this, it is important to equip people  |
|              | with roles and the knowledge required to support      |
|              | their success in such a role. This could look like an |
|              | educational seminar, information gathering session or |
|              | implementation project. Special interest groups are   |
|              | likely to leverage the engagement strategies listed   |
|              | here, and can be quite powerful to enact change.      |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Some examples of special interest groups might be the |
|              | assembling of a task-force or committee - best if     |
|              | sponsored from on high, but ad-hoc can lay the        |
|              | foundation. Or, you can consider the group a          |
|              | community of practice if you feel that you might not  |
|              | yet have enough buy-in to formalize. Try and ensure   |
|              | diverse participation from across the various         |
|              | stakeholder groups at your institution. Lastly,       |
|              | ensure you keep records of your progress and evaluate |
|              | your actions. At a certain point, you are going to    |
|              | want to be able to share your work and your impact.   |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Facilitated  | It is impossible to know how change will affect       |
| Group        | people without speaking with them directly. In        |
| Discussion   | addition to understanding the impact of change (such  |
|              | as adopting OER in a course), people are more likely  |
|              | to engage in change if they feel consulted.           |
|              | Facilitated group discussions can be a great way to   |
|              | uncover the common barriers to adoption, connect      |
|              | people with the support they need, and ensure that    |
|              | change is happening collaboratively.                  |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Focus groups are a great opportunity to glean         |
|              | qualitative data that can inform your future actions. |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Modeling /   | The "unknown" of change can be the biggest barrier of |
| Exemplars    | all. Modeling the outcomes of change and helping      |
|              | people observe what the end state will or can be is a |
|              | great way to alleviate change related apprehension.   |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Celebrate your champions and early adopters! Tell     |
|              | their stories, or better yet, have them tell their    |
|              | stories and ensure you have a communications plan in  |
|              | place to do so!                                       |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| C            | Projects which create collaborative work between      |
| ollaboration | faculty, instructors, and pedagogical or edtech units |
|              | on campus are an opportunity to organically introduce |
|              | the opportunity for OER in a way that can avoid       |
|              | challenging status quo. Simply presenting OER as an   |
|              | option and weighing the benefits are a great way to   |
|              | support faculty in choosing to adopt OER.             |
|              |                                                       |
|              | We would include targeted 1:1 (or 2:1 in our case!)   |
|              | consultations under this category. The way that we    |
|              | approach this is to be reviewing course offerings for |
|              | the coming semester, with an eye to impact. We do our |
|              | homework through a review of course outlines,         |
|              | enrollment, learning outcomes etc. We also review     |
|              | available OER that might be suitable for the course.  |
|              | We then email the instructors and request a meeting   |
|              | to discuss these options.                             |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Find your people, people!                             |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Embedded     | This would involve identifying one or multiple        |
| Championship | individuals in an institution who have "high-touch"   |
|              | roles, to personally champion OER. Ideally this       |
|              | person would be an active participant on pedagogical  |
|              | / teaching and learning projects where opportunities  |
|              | for OER use can be organically raised during project  |
|              | activities.                                           |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+

Some text is a derivative of content within [The Champion\'s
Toolkit,](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Fyt-dhaXwvGVHKv2ZB4HtphTNYCPsfl8m68Q_xw3CdQ/edit#)
by the [Alberta OER Initiative,](http://albertaoer.com/) licensed under
CC BY-NC 4.0

#### **Start Small, Think Big**

In the beginning, open advocacy can feel lonely and laborious. Remember
to start small and celebrate little wins. More consistent wins (even if
on a smaller scale) will help you navigate the negative feelings
associated with any rough patches. Celebrate these victories by sharing
them on your own campus, but also with your personal learning network.
Sharing these small accomplishments will help you lay the groundwork for
bigger ideas and future collaborations.

Think about what exists as low-hanging fruit at your institution. What
are some easy wins that you can identify to help you gather momentum?
Have a plan in mind that helps you move from low-stakes (such as
adoptions or adaptions) to high-stakes opportunities (such as
organizational recognition and policies).

Michelle Reed, an Open Education Librarian from the University of Texas
Arlington, has provided an example of what a continuum of activities
could look like, with appropriate and module-specific additions added by
us:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Start Small** **A Bit More**                  **Think Big**
  --------------- ------------------------------- -----------------------
  Share Resources Engage in Formal                Grant/Incentive
                  Presentations/Conversations     Programs

  Blog About Your Form Partnerships/Committee     OER Identified Courses
  Efforts                                         

  Do Your         Student Survey/Faculty Survey   OER Policy
  Homework                                        

  Talk to         Adopter Awards/Profiles/Panels  Open as Part of Tenure
  Everyone                                        and Promotion
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Some text is a derivative of content within [Supporting Open Textbook
Adoptions at University of
Houston](https://www.slideshare.net/oelib/supporting-open-textbook-adoptions-at-university-of-houston-88305920)
by the Michelle Reed, licensed under [CC-BY
4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

#### **Summary**

Hopefully this module has provided you with some ideas and inspiration
to get started. As a final word, we will only say this: it is imperative
that you stay reflective and critical in the work. We all believe in the
greater good of open, but do not let that mask important critical and
difficult questions! Some important writings on some of these questions
can be found in the following pieces:

"[Pragmatism vs Idealism and the Identity Crisis of OER
Advocacy](https://openpraxis.org/index.php/OpenPraxis/article/view/569)"
by Rajiv Jhangiani

"[Copyright as a Colonizer's
Tool](https://medium.com/@lorraine_chu3n/copyright-as-a-colonizers-tool-lessons-from-the-2018-ccsummit-7677963d798a)"
by Lorraine Chuen

"[Who is Missing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cQ3RP0kOppQ)?" and
"[Not All Information Wants to be
Free](http://eprints.rclis.org/32463/)" by Tara Robertson

#### **Day 13 Activity**

**Option 1:** Think of your "Why." Can you answer the question "Why Open
Makes Sense to Me"? Craft a short paragraph and share it in the
discussion area. Even better, share it as a series of tweets using the
hashtags #MakingSense18 and #myopenwhy.

**Option 2:** What are your goals? What are a few reasonable actions you
can take in the next academic year? Share back with the group for
feedback and advice.

Going Forward: SPARC has an excellent set of worksheets to help you
build a campus action plan. Review [SPARC\'s Open Education Action
Plan](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14LLYZoi8es6vVsMDF9zrbPYBwVHu1lvdtd5tccwaJLs/edit),
and while it is unlikely that you can complete them in the timeframe of
this MOOC, work with your people to develop a plan that makes sense for
your campus.

#### **Explore More**

CCs Why Open? Slidedeck

https://opencontent.shinyapps.io/OER-Impact-Calculator/

#### **References**

McNutt, K. (2016), OER Champion's Toolkit. Retrieved from:
www.albertaoer.com

#### **Attribution**

All content for *Making Sense of Open Education Day 13* by Claire
Coulter and Ali Versluis is licensed with a [CC BY 4.0
International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license
(unless otherwise indicated with citation, referencing, and
attribution).
